Woodrow WilsonCentralNoticeWoodrow WilsonFrom Wikipedia, the free encyclopediaJump to:navigation,searchWoodrow WilsonPresident Wilson in 191928thPresident of the United StatesIn officeMarch 4, 1913&#160;&ndash; March 4, 1921Vice PresidentThomas R. MarshallPreceded byWilliam Howard TaftSucceeded byWarren G. Harding34thGovernor of New JerseyIn officeJanuary 17, 1911&#160;&ndash; March 1, 1913Preceded byJohn FortSucceeded byJames Fielder(Acting)13thPresident of Princeton UniversityIn office1902&ndash;1910Preceded byFrancis PattonSucceeded byJohn Aikman Stewart(Acting)Personal detailsBornThomas Woodrow Wilson(1856-12-28)December 28, 1856Staunton, Virginia, U.S.DiedFebruary 3, 1924(1924-02-03)(aged&#160;67)Washington, D.C., U.S.Resting placeWashington National CathedralWashington, D.C.Political partyDemocraticSpouse(s)Ellen Axson(m.&#160;1885; her death&#160;1914)Edith Bolling(m.&#160;1915; his death&#160;1924)ChildrenMargaret,Jessie, andEleanorAlma materDavidson CollegePrinceton University(B.A.)University of VirginiaJohns Hopkins University(Ph.D.)ProfessionAcademicHistorianPolitical scientistReligionPresbyterianismAwardsNobel Peace PrizeSignatureThomas Woodrow Wilson(December&#160;28, 1856 &ndash; February&#160;3, 1924) was anAmericanpolitician and academic who served as the28thPresident of the United Statesfrom 1913 to 1921. Born and raised in theSouth, Wilson earned a Ph.D in political science, working as a professor and scholar at various institutions before being chosen asPresident of Princeton University, where he worked from 1902 to 1910. In the election of 1910, he was the gubernatorial candidate ofNew Jersey's Democratic Party, and was elected the 34thGovernor of New Jersey, serving from 1911 to 1913. Running for president in1912, a split in the Republican Party allowed his plurality, just over forty percent, to win him a large electoral college margin. As President, Wilson was a leading force in theProgressive Movement, bolstered by hisDemocratic Party'swinning control of both the White House and Congress in 1912.In office, Wilson reintroduced the spokenState of the Union, which had been out of use since 1801. Leading the Congress, now in Democratic hands, he oversaw the passage of progressive legislative policies unparalleled until theNew Dealin 1933.[1]Included among these were theFederal Reserve Act,Federal Trade Commission Act, theClayton Antitrust Act, and theFederal Farm Loan Act. Having taken office one month after ratification of theSixteenth Amendment, Wilson called a special session of Congress, whose work culminated in theRevenue Act of 1913, reintroducing anincome taxand lowering tariffs. Through passage of theAdamson Act, imposing an 8-hour workday for railroads, he averted a railroad strike and an ensuing economic crisis.[2]Upon the outbreak of World War I in 1914, Wilson maintained a policy of neutrality, while pursuing a more aggressive policy in dealing withMexico's civil war.Wilson faced formerUnited States Supreme Court associate justiceCharles Evans HughesofNew Yorkin thepresidential elections of 1916, and became the first Democrat sinceAndrew Jacksonelected to consecutive terms. He was narrowly re-elected on the slogan, "He kept us out of war". Wilson's second term, however, was dominated byAmerican entry into World War I. In April 1917, when Germany resumed unrestricted submarine warfare, Wilson asked Congress to declare war in order to make "the world safe for democracy." The United States conducted military operations alongside the Allies, although without a formal alliance. During the war, Wilson focused on diplomacy and financial considerations, leaving military strategy to the generals, especially GeneralJohn J. Pershing. Loaning billions of dollars to Britain, France, and other Allies, the United States aided their finance of the war effort. Through theSelective Service Act, conscription sent 10,000 freshly trained soldiers to France, per day, by summer of 1918. On the home front, he raised income taxes, borrowing billions of dollars through the public's purchase ofLiberty Bonds. He set up theWar Industries Board, promotedlabor unioncooperation, regulating agriculture and food production through theLever Act, and granting to the Secretary of the Treasury,William McAdoo, direct control of the nation's railroad system.In his 1915 State of the Union, Wilson asked Congress for what became theEspionage Act of 1917and theSedition Act of 1918, suppressinganti-war movements. His crackdownwas intensified by his Attorney General A. Mitchell Palmerto include non-citizen antiwar activists during theFirst Red Scareof 1919&ndash;1920. Following years of advocacy for suffrage on the state level, in 1918 he endorsed theNineteenth Amendmentwhose ratification providedall women the right to voteby its ratification in 1920, over Southern opposition. Meanwhile, in the federalCivil Service, Wilson endorsedracial segregation, granting department heads greater autonomy in their management.[3]Early in 1918, he issued his principles for peace, theFourteen Points,and in 1919, followingarmistice, he traveled toParis, promoting the formation of aLeague of Nations, concluding theTreaty of Versailles. Following his return from Europe, Wilson embarked on a nationwide tour in 1919 to campaign for the treaty, suffering a severe stroke. The treaty was met with serious concern by Senate Republicans, and Wilson rejected a compromise effort led byHenry Cabot Lodge, leading to the Senate's rejection of the treaty. Due to his stroke, Wilson secluded himself in the White House, disability having diminished his power and influence. Forming a strategy for reelection, Wilson deadlocked the1920 Democratic National Convention, but his bid for a third term nomination was overlooked.A devoted Presbyterian, Wilson infused morality into hisinternationalism, an ideology now referred to as "Wilsonian"&mdash; a contentious position ofAmerican foreign policyobligating the United States to promote global democracy.[4][5][6]For his sponsorship of the League of Nations, Wilson was awarded the 1919Nobel Peace Prize, the second of three sitting presidents so honored.[7][8]Contents1Early life2Education3Marriage and family4Personal interests5Academic career6Political science author6.1U.S. democratic republic and British parliament contrast6.2Public administration7President of Princeton University8Governor of New Jersey9Presidential Election of 19129.1Democratic nomination9.2General election10Presidency (1913&ndash;1921)10.1First term, 1913&ndash;191710.1.1Tariff legislation10.1.2Federal Reserve System10.1.3Antitrust and other measures10.1.4Mexican Revolution10.1.5Miners strike, wife's death and remarriage10.1.6World War I, 1914&ndash;191610.2Presidential Election of 191610.3Second term, 1917&ndash;192110.3.1Entry into World War I10.3.2Home front10.3.3The Fourteen Points10.3.4Peace Conference 191910.3.5Treaty fight, 191910.3.6Post war: 1919&ndash;192010.3.7Other foreign affairs10.3.8Incapacity10.3.9Woman's suffrage10.3.10Civil rights10.4Administration and Cabinet10.5Judicial appointments10.5.1Supreme Court10.5.2Other courts11Final years and death12Legacy12.1Named for Wilson13Works14Media15See also16Notes17Bibliography17.1Biographical17.2Scholarly topical studies17.3Primary sources18External linksEarly lifeWilson c. mid 1870sWilson was born inStaunton, Virginia, on December&#160;28, 1856, at 18&ndash;24 North Coalter Street (now theWoodrow Wilson Presidential Library), of Scots-Irish descent.[9]He was the third of four children ofJoseph Ruggles Wilson(1822&ndash;1903) and Jessie Janet Woodrow (1826&ndash;1888).[10]Wilson's paternal grandparents immigrated to the United States fromStrabane,County Tyrone, Ireland (nowNorthern Ireland), in 1807. His mother was born inCarlisle,Cumberland, England, the daughter of Rev. Dr. Thomas Woodrow fromPaisley, Scotland, and Marion Williamson fromGlasgow.[11]This was one of the Border Counties, which supplied many immigrants to the North American colonies in the late 18th century.Joseph originally lived inSteubenville, Ohio, where his family had settled. Wilson's grandfather had published apro-tariffandanti-slaverynewspaper,The Western Herald and Gazette.[12]Wilson's parents moved south in 1851 and came to fully identify with it. His father defendedslavery, owned slaves and set up a Sunday school for them. Both parents identified with the Confederacy; they cared for wounded soldiers at their church, and Wilson's father briefly served as a chaplain to theConfederate Army.[13]Woodrow Wilson's earliest memory, from the age of three, was of hearing thatAbraham Lincolnhad been elected and that a war was coming. Wilson would forever recall standing for a moment at GeneralRobert E. Lee's side and looking up into his face.[13]Wilson's father was one of the founders of the SouthernPresbyterian Church in the United States(PCUS) in 1861 after it split from the northern Presbyterians. He served as the first permanent clerk of the southern church's General Assembly, was Stated Clerk from 1865 to 1898, and was Moderator of the PCUS General Assembly in 1879. He became minister of the First Presbyterian Church inAugusta, Georgia, and the family lived there until young Wilson was 14.[14][14]Wilson in 1873 formally became a member of theColumbia First Presbyterian Churchand remained a member throughout his life.[15]EducationWilson's reading began at age ten, possibly delayed bydyslexia; he later blamed the lack of schools in thepostbellumSouth. As a teen, he taught himself the Grahamshorthandsystem to compensate, and achieved academically with self-discipline, studying at home with his father, then in classes at a small Augusta school.[16]DuringReconstruction, Wilson lived inColumbia, South Carolina, from 1870 to 1874, while his father was professor at theColumbia Theological Seminary.[17]His father moved the family toWilmington, North Carolina, in 1874 where he was the minister at First Presbyterian Church until 1882. Wilson attendedDavidson Collegein North Carolina for the 1873&ndash;74 school year, cut short by illness, then transferred toPrincetonas a freshman when his father began teaching at the university. He graduated in 1879, a member ofPhi Kappa Psifraternity. In his second year, he studied political philosophy and history, was active in theWhigliterary and debating society, and wrote for theNassau Literary Review.[18]He organized the Liberal Debating Society[19]and later coached the Whig&ndash;ClioDebate Panel.[20]In the hotly contested election of 1876, Wilson declared his support for the Democratic Party and its nominee,Samuel J. Tilden.[21]In 1879, Wilson attended law school at theUniversity of Virginiafor one year; he was involved in theVirginia Glee Cluband was president of theJefferson Literary and Debating Society.[22]While there, he enjoyed frequent trips to his birthplace of Staunton. He visited with cousins, and fell in love with one, Hattie Woodrow, though his affections were unrequited.[23]His health became frail and dictated withdrawal, so he went home to his parents, then living inWilmington, North Carolina, where he continued his law studies.[24]Wilson was admitted to the Georgia bar and made a brief attempt at law practice in January&#160;1882; he found legal history and substantive jurisprudence interesting, but abhorred the day-to-day procedural aspects. After less than a year, he abandoned the practice to pursue his study of political science and history. Both parents expressed concern over a potentially premature decision.[25]Ellen Axson Wilson (1883)In the fall of April&#160;1883, Wilson enteredJohns Hopkins Universityto study history, political science and the German language.[26]Three years later, he completed his doctoral dissertation,Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics,[27]and received aPh.D.[28]Marriage and familyIn late spring of 1883, Wilson was summoned toRome, Georgia, to assist in the settlement of his maternal uncle William's estate, which was being mishandled by a brother-in-law. While there he met and fell in love withEllen Louise Axson, the daughter of a minister fromSavannah, Georgia; he proposed to her and they became engaged in Asheville.[29]Wilson's marriage to Ellen was delayed by traumatic developments in her family; in late 1883, Ellen's father Edward, suffering fromdepression, was admitted to the Georgia State Mental Hospital, where in 1884 he committedsuicide. After closing the family home in Rome, Georgia, and recovering from the initial shock, Ellen gained admission to theArt Students League of New York. After graduation, she pursued portrait art and received a medal for one of her works from the Paris International Exposition. She happily agreed to sacrifice further independent artistic pursuits in order to keep her marriage commitment, and in 1885 she and Wilson married.[30]Personal interestsWilson was an automobile enthusiast, and took daily rides while he was President in his favorite car, a 1919Pierce-Arrow.[31]His enjoyment of motoring made him an advocate of funding for publichighways.[32]Wilson was an avid baseball fan, and in 1915 became the first sitting president to attend, and throw out the first ball at, aWorld Seriesgame. Wilson had been acenter fielderduring his Davidson College days and was the Princeton team's assistant manager.[33]He cycled regularly, taking several cycling vacations in the EnglishLake District.[34]Wilson later took up golf.[35]Academic careerdaughters Jessie and Margaretdaughter EleanorWilson worked as a lecturer atCornell Universityin 1886&ndash;87, where he joined theIrving Literary Society. He next taught atBryn Mawr Collegefrom 1885 until 1888, teaching ancient Greek and Roman history; while there, he refused offers from the universities of Michigan and Indiana.[36]When Ellen was pregnant with their first child in 1886, the couple decided that Ellen should go to her Aunt Louisa Brown's residence inGainesville, Georgia, to have their first child; she arrived just one day before the baby, Margaret, was born in April&#160;1886. Their second child, Jessie, was born in August&#160;1887.[37]In 1888, Wilson left Bryn Mawr forWesleyan University; it was a controversial move, as he had signed a three-year contract with Bryn Mawr in 1887. Both parties claimed contract violations and the matter subsided.[38]At Wesleyan, he coached thefootballteam and founded the debate team, which bears his name.[39]In February&#160;1890, with the help of friends, Wilson was elected by the Princeton University board to the Chair of Jurisprudence and Political Economy, at an annual salary of $3000.[40]He continued a previous practice of reserving time for a six-week course in administration at Johns Hopkins.[41]He was also a faculty member of the short-lived coordinate college,Evelyn College for Women. Additionally, Wilson became the first lecturer of Constitutional Law atNew York Law School, where he taught withCharles Evans Hughes.[42]Representing theAmerican Whig Society, Wilson delivered an oration at Princeton's sesquicentennial celebration (1896) entitled "Princeton in the Nation's Service," which was the origin for the school's motto.[43]Wilson became annoyed that Princeton was not living up to its potential, complaining, "There's a little college down in Kentucky which in 60 years has graduated more men who have acquired prominence and fame than has Princeton in her 150 years."[44]Political science authorU.S. democratic republic and British parliament contrastWilson, a disciple ofWalter Bagehot, considered theUnited States Constitutionto be cumbersome and open to corruption. Wilson favored aparliamentary systemfor the United States and in the early 1880s wrote, "I ask you to put this question to yourselves, should we not draw the Executive and Legislature closer together? Should we not, on the one hand, give the individual leaders of opinion in Congress a better chance to have an intimate party in determining who should be president, and the president, on the other hand, a better chance to approve himself a statesman, and his advisers capable men of affairs, in the guidance of Congress."[45]Wilson's first political work,Congressional Government(1885), advocated a parliamentary system. He critically described the United States government, with frequent negative comparisons toWestminster. Critics contended the book was written without the benefit of the author observing any operational aspect of the U.S. Congress, and supporters asserted the work was the product of the imagination of a future statesman. The book reflected the greater power of the legislature, relative to the executive, during the post-bellum period.[46]Wilson later became a regular contributor toPolitical Science Quarterly,an academic journal.[47]Wilson's second publication in 1890 was a textbook, entitledThe State, used widely in college courses throughout the country until the 1920s. He argued that government should not be deemed evil and advocated the use of government to allay social ills and advance society's welfare.[48]in 1889 Wilson contributed to a U.S. historical series, covering the period from Pres. Jackson through Reconstruction. His third book, entitledDivision and Reunion, was published in 1893 and considered an outstanding contribution to American historical writing.[49]Wilson's fourth publication, a five-volume work entitledHistory of the American People, was the culmination of a series of articles written forHarper's, and was published in 1902.[50]In 1899, Wilson wrote in &ldquo;The State&rdquo; that governments could legitimately promote the general welfare &ldquo;by forbidding child labor, by supervising the sanitary conditions of factories, by limiting the employment of women in occupations hurtful to their health, by instituting official tests of the purity or the quality of goods sold, by limiting the hours of labor in certain trades, [and] by a hundred and one limitations of the power of unscrupulous or heartless men to out-do the scrupulous and merciful in trade or industry.&rdquo;[51]Wilson believed that America's system ofchecks and balancescomplicated American governance. If government behaved badly, Wilson queried, "How is the schoolmaster, the nation, to know which boy needs the whipping?"[52]Wilson singled out theUnited States House of Representativesfor particular criticism, saying,"... divided up, as it were, into forty-seven seignories, in each of which a Standing Committee is the court-baron and its chairman lord-proprietor. These petty barons, some of them not a little powerful, but none of them within reach [of] the full powers of rule, may at will exercise an almost despotic sway within their own shires, and may sometimes threaten to convulse even the realm itself."[53]In his last scholarly work,Constitutional Government of the United States(1908), Wilson said that the presidency "will be as big as and as influential as the man who occupies it." By the time of his presidency, Wilson hoped that presidents could be party leaders in the same way British prime ministers were. Wilson also hoped that the parties could be reorganized along ideological, not geographic, lines. He wrote, "Eight words contain the sum of the present degradation of our political parties: No leaders, no principles; no principles, no parties."[54]Wilson also wrote that charity efforts should be removed from the private domain and "made the imperative legal duty of the whole,&rdquo; a position which, according to Robert M. Saunders, seemed to indicate that Wilson &ldquo;was laying the groundwork for the modern welfare state.&rdquo;[55]Public administrationWilson also studied public administration, which he called "...government in action; it is the executive, the operative, the most visible side of government, and is of course as old as government itself".[56]He believed that the study of public administration could enable officials to increase governmental efficiency.[57]He faulted political leaders who focused on philosophical issues and the nature of government and dismissed the critical issues of government administration as mere "practical detail". He thought such attitudes represented the requirements of smaller countries and populations. By his day, he thought, "...it is getting to be harder to run a constitution than to frame one."[58]He thought it time "...to straighten the paths of government, to make its business less unbusinesslike, to strengthen and purify its organization, and it to crown its dutifulness".[59]He summarized the growth of such foreign states as Prussia, France, and England, highlighting the events that led to advances in administration.By contrast, he thought the United States required greater compromise because of the diversity of public opinion and the difficulty of forming a majority opinion; thus practical reform to the government was necessarily slow. Yet Wilson insisted that "...administration lies outside the proper sphere of politics"[60]and that "...general laws which direct these things to be done are as obviously outside of and above administration."[61]He likened administration to a machine that functions independent of the changing mood of its leaders. Such a line of demarcation is intended to focus responsibility for actions taken on the people or persons in charge. As Wilson put it, "...public attention must be easily directed, in each case of good or bad administration, to just the man deserving of praise or blame. There is no danger in power, if only it be not irresponsible. If it be divided, dealt out in share to many, it is obscured..."[62]Essentially, the items under the discretion of administration must be limited in scope, as to not block, nullify, obfuscate, or modify the implementation of governmental decree made by the executive branch.President of Princeton UniversityWilson &ndash; Princeton's president (1902)Wilson had in the past been offered the presidency at the University of Illinois in 1892, and at the University of Virginia in 1901, both of which he declined.[63]The Princeton trustees promoted Professor Wilson to president in June&#160;1902, replacingFrancis Landey Patton, whom the trustees perceived to be an inefficient administrator.[63]Although the school's endowment was barely $4&#160;million, Wilson sought $2&#160;million for a preceptorial system of teaching, $1&#160;million for a school of science, and nearly $3&#160;million for new buildings and salary increases. As a long-term objective, Wilson sought $3&#160;million for a graduate school and $2.5&#160;million for schools of jurisprudence andelectrical engineering, as well as a museum of natural history.[64]He increased the faculty from 112 to 174, most of whom he selected himself on the basis of their records as outstanding teachers. The curriculum guidelines he developed proved important progressive innovations in the field of higher education.[65]Wilson also made biblical studies a scholarly pursuit, appointed the first Jew and the first Roman Catholic to the faculty, and helped liberate the board from domination by conservative Presbyterians.[66]To emphasize the development of expertise, Wilson instituted academic departments and a system of core requirements. Students were to meet for these in groups of six with preceptors, followed by two years of concentration in a selected major. He tried to raise admission standards and to replace the "gentleman's C" with serious study. Wilson aspired, as he told alumni, "to transform thoughtless boys performing tasks into thinking men".[67]In 1906 Wilson awoke to find himself blind in the left eye, the result of a blood clot and hypertension. Modern medical opinion surmises Wilson had suffered astroke&mdash;he later was diagnosed, as his father had been, withhardening of the arteries; he took a Bermuda vacation. He began to exhibit his father's traits of impatience and intolerance, which would on occasion lead to errors of judgment.[68]In 1896 Wilson had, somewhat prophetically, described his problem, in the sesquicentennial speech at Princeton: "...your thorough Presbyterian is not subject to the ordinary laws of life, is of too stubborn a fiber, too unrelaxing a purpose, to suffer mere inconvenience to bring defeat".[66]Prospect House, Wilson's home onPrinceton'scampusWhen Wilson began vacationing in Bermuda in 1906, he met a socialite, Mary Hulbert Peck. Their visits together became a regular occurrence on his return. Wilson in his letters home to Ellen openly related these gatherings as well his other social events. According to biographerAugust Heckscher, Ellen could sense a problem, and it became the topic of frank discussion between them. Wilson historians have not conclusively established there was an affair; but Wilson did on one occasion write a musing in shorthand&mdash;on the reverse side of a draft for an editorial: "my precious one, my beloved Mary".;[69]Wilson also sent very personal letters which would be used against him by his adversaries later.[70]On another occasion while Wilson was vacationing solo in the British Isles, Ellen journeyed to Connecticut. She joined the household of respected artistFlorence Griswoldto further pursue her own interests.[71]During his time at Princeton, he attempted to curtail the influence of social elites by abolishing the upper-classeating clubs. He proposed moving the students into colleges, also known as quadrangles. Wilson's Quad Plan was met with fierce opposition from Princeton's alumni. Wilson persisted, saying that giving in "would be to temporize with evil".[72]In October&#160;1907, due to the intensity of alumni opposition, the Board of Trustees withdrew its support for the Quad Plan and instructed Wilson to withdraw it.[73]Not long afterward, Wilson suffered a recurrence of his 1906 ailment; as before, a vacation was prescribed and proved beneficial.[71]Late in his tenure, Wilson had a confrontation withAndrew Fleming West, dean of the graduate school, and also West's ally ex-PresidentGrover Cleveland, who was a trustee. Wilson wanted to integrate a proposed graduate school building into the campus core, while West preferred a more distant campus site. In 1909 Wilson's final year at Princeton began with a gift made to the graduate school campaign subject to the graduate school being located off campus; the acceptance of this condition by the board was a pivotal defeat for Wilson.[74]The national press covered the confrontation as a battle between the elites, represented by West, versus the populists, represented by Wilson.From its outset, Wilson became disenchanted with resistance to his recommendations at Princeton; he ruminated on future political leadership. Prior to the Democratic presidential nominating convention in 1908, Wilson had dropped hints to some influential players in the Democratic Party of his interest in the Democratic ticket. While he had no real expectations of being placed on the ticket, he did leave instructions that he should not be offered the vice presidential nomination. And then he was off for a vacation in Scotland. Party regulars considered his ideas politically as well as geographically detached and fanciful. But, the seeds had been sown.[75]Wilson later commented that politics was less brusque than university administration.[76]Wilson was elected president of theAmerican Political Science Associationin 1910, but soon decided to leave his Princeton post and enter New Jerseystate politics.[77]McGeorge Bundyin 1956 described Wilson's contribution to Princeton: "Wilson was right in his conviction that Princeton must be more than a wonderfully pleasant and decent home for nice young men; it has been more ever since his time".[78]Governor of New JerseyGov. Wilson, 1911In January&#160;1910 Wilson had drawn the attention of New Jersey'sU.S. Senator James Smith, Jr.and George Harvey as the potential Democratic standard bearer in the upcoming gubernatorial election. On July&#160;12, 1910 he was introduced to New Jersey's power players at the Lawyers Club in New York, includingJames Richard Nugent,Robert S. Hudspeth,Millard F. Ross, andRichard V. Lindabury. The bosses had chosen their man, but his nomination was not a given&mdash;many, including organized labor, felt Wilson was an inexperienced newcomer.[79]Nevertheless, the bosses marshaled their forces at the party convention, and on September&#160;14 Wilson was nominated; this, despite his endorsement of the local option on the liquor issue&mdash;in opposition to the political machine. He submitted his letter of resignation to Princeton on October&#160;20.[80]Wilson's opponent in the general election was the Republican candidateVivian M. Lewis, the State Commissioner of Banking and Insurance. Wilson's campaign focused on his promise to be independent of party bosses. Wilson quickly shed his professorial style for more emboldened speechmaking, and presented himself as a full-fledged progressive.[81]He soundly defeated Lewis by a margin of more than 650,000 votes, although RepublicanWilliam Howard Tafthad carried New Jersey in the1908 presidential electionby more than 82,000 votes.[82][83]HistorianEdmund Morriscalled Wilson in the Governor's race a "dark horse." He attributed his and others' success against the Taft Republicans in 1910 in part to the emergent nationalprogressivemessage enunciated byTheodore Rooseveltin his post-presidency.[84]In the 1910 election, the Democrats also took control of theGeneral Assembly, though theState Senateremained in Republican hands. Wilson appointedJoseph Patrick Tumultyas his private secretary, a position he held throughout Wilson's political career.[85]He began formulating his reformist agenda, intending to ignore the demands of party machinery. After Wilson's election, political boss U.S. Senator Smith asked Wilson to endorse his own reelection bid in the state legislature (this was before popular election of senators); Wilson refused, and endorsed Smith's opponentJames E Martine. When Martine won the seat, Wilson had manifestly positioned himself as a new leader in the party in that state.[86]Wilson concentrated on four major state reforms&mdash;changes in the election laws, a corrupt practices act, Workmen's Compensation, and establishment of a commission to regulate utilities. The Geran bill, drafted by Del. Elmer H Geran, expanded public participation in primaries for all offices including party officials and delegates; it was thus directed at the power of the political bosses. It passed the state assembly, albeit by a narrow margin. The corrupt practices law and Workmen's Compensation statute soon followed.[87]Presidential Election of 1912Main article:United States presidential election, 1912Democratic nominationWilson's prominence as governor and in the national media induced his presidential campaign in 1912. Wilson committed himself to try for the Democratic nomination in March of the prior year when he spoke at an Atlanta meeting of the Southern Commercial Congress; afterwards he said&#160;: "I was given a dinner, breakfast and reception, and on every possible occasion was nominated for the presidency!"[88]While Wilson was in Atlanta, his wife Ellen, alert that key DemocratWilliam Jennings Bryanwas visiting Princeton, and recalling Wilson's opposition to him in 1896, invited him for dinner upon Wilson's return. Indeed, the establishment of rapport with Bryan, the most recent standard bearer of the party, was a success.[89]Champ Clark, Wilson's foremost opponent for the Democratic nominationWilliam Jennings Bryan shifted his support from Clark to Wilson and ushered in the nominationWilson began a truly public campaign for the nomination in the south, with a speech to the Pewter Platter Club in Norfolk, Va.. While he was received enthusiastically, the speech, reformist in nature, was considered provocative and radical by the conservative audience, making the visit on the whole less than positive.[90]With Wilson the first Southerner to have a serious chance at the White House since 1848 however, Southern Democrats in general strongly supported Wilson's campaign for the nomination in 1912.[91]More of Wilson's support came from young progressives in that region, including intellectuals, editors and lawyers. Wilson managed to maneuver through the complexities of local politics. For example, in Tennessee the Democratic Party was divided overprohibition; Wilson was progressive and sober, but not dry, and appealed to both sides. They united behind him to win the presidential election in the state, but divided over state politics and lost the gubernatorial election.[92]After Norfolk, Wilson then proceeded westward to Kansas, Colorado, California, Oregon and Washington; he favored voting reforms which empowered the populace, such as theinitiative, thereferendumand therecall(excepting judges).[93]In California Wilson was asked about his views on women's suffrage and though he was firmly opposed, he evasively said that it was a matter for the states to decide.[94]In July&#160;1911 Wilson broughtWilliam Gibbs McAdooandEdward Mandell Housein to manage the campaign.[95]The1912 Democratic conventionin Baltimore was one of the most dramatic conventions in American history; only the Republican conventions of 1880 and 1940, and the Democratic convention of 1952 are comparable.[96]William F. McCombswho helped Wilson win the governorship served as convention Chairman. The Republicans at their convention had set the stage a week earlier, nominating incumbent William Howard Taft, with Theodore Roosevelt stalking out, to launch an independent campaign to split the party vote.[97]Wilson was convinced that the Baltimore convention should be allowed to work its will without his interference&mdash;so he went golfing and motoring. As for his assistant Tumulty, he "nearly collapsed" under the strain[98]The convention deadlocked for over forty ballots&mdash;no candidate could reach the two-thirds vote required. The leading contender was House SpeakerChamp Clark, a prominent progressive, strongest in the border states. Other less charismatic contenders were GovernorJudson Harmonof Ohio, and RepresentativeOscar Underwoodof Alabama. PublisherWilliam Randolph Hearst, a leader of the left wing of the party, supported Clark.William Jennings Bryan, the nominee in 1896, 1900 and 1908, played a critical role in his declared opposition to any candidate supported by "the financiers of Wall Street". Indeed, on the tenth ballot New York's delegation went unanimously to Clark, and the battle lines were clearly drawn between the bosses and the rank and file delegates.[99]Bryan then announced on the fourteenth ballot that his vote for Clark would be withheld due to the New York vote. Wilson's tally began to climb steadily, and he initially topped Clark's vote on the thirtieth ballot.[100]Bryan announced for Wilson, who ultimately won the nomination on the 46th ballot.[101]Wilson chose Indiana GovernorThomas R. Marshallas his running mate[102]General electionWilson directed Chairman of Finance,Henry Morgenthaunot to accept contributions from corporations and to prioritize smaller donations from the widest possible quarters of the public, and Morgenthau succeeded admirably. In order to further embolden Democrats, especially in New Jersey and New York, Wilson set out to ensure the defeat of local candidates supported by machines, who were running for re-election&mdash;James Smith Jr. (U.S. Senate in New Jersey) and John Dix (Governor of New York). He succeeded in both of these efforts and thereby weakened arguments that party control resided with political bosses.[103]Speeches in Buffalo and New York City exemplified the pattern of Wilson's speechmaking. His oratory style was, "right out of my mind as it is working at the time". He maintained towards his primary opponent Roosevelt a tone of humorous detachment, describing the Bull Moose party as "the irregular Republicans, the variegated Republicans". Wilson shunned the stump speech campaign routine, and initially was reticent to conduct an extensive campaign tour, but this changed after Roosevelt went on the offensive.[104]1912 Electoral Vote MapA notably progressive speech In Minneapolis included the following: "that property as compared with humanity, as compared with the vital red blood in the American people, must take second place, not first place".[105]Wilson frequently sought outLouis D. Brandeisfor advice on economic policy&mdash;that corporate trusts be regulated by the government. His campaign then increased its focus upon the elimination of monopoly in all forms. Wilson also concluded that major reforms in banking and a lower tariff were needed to eliminate the spheres of entrenched interests which distorted the functioning of the free-market.[106]In Indianapolis he said that for the next president "there will be no greater burden in our generation than to organize the forces of liberty&hellip; And to make conquest of a new freedom for America". This serendipitous comment spawned the title of Wilson's policy of"New Freedom", emphasizing the lower tariffs and limited federal government&ndash;albeit with increased anti-trust law enforcement and creation of a new banking regulator, theFederal Reserve System.[107]When Roosevelt was wounded by an assassin, Wilson restricted his events to those already scheduled and limited his criticism to the regular Republicans. It was evident by this time that the Wilson movement would not be checked.[108]The GOP split between Taft and Roosevelt enlarged Wilson's success in the electoral college. Wilson appealed to African Americans and promised to work for them, gaining some support among them in the North at the expense of the Republicans. Wilson took 41.8% of the popular vote and won 435 electoral votes from 40 states.[109]It is not clear if Roosevelt extracted more support from fellow Republican Taft, or fellow progressive Wilson.[110]Presidency (1913&ndash;1921)First term, 1913&ndash;1917Woodrow WilsonAfter a vacation in Bermuda Wilson was energized and more aggressive, even combative. He noted the presidency was an office "in which a man must put on his war paint&rdquo;. In Chicago, he addressed the Commercial Club, including some of the most powerful industrial and financial leaders of the Midwest; he unapologetically emphasized his progressivism and called his audience to account for their malpractices in business affairs.[111]Woodrow Wilson sworn in March&#160;4, 1913In his inaugural address Wilson reiterated his agenda for lower tariffs and banking reform, as well as aggressive trust and labor legislation. the Wilsons decided against an inaugural ball and instead gathered with family and friends at the White House.[112]Wilson's demand for private reflection was evident when he immediately announced that office seekers were not permitted to visit the White House. His decision-making style was to use solitude in conjunction with prevailing opinions in making decisions.[113]Wilson's personal staff reflected his preferences; Tumulty&rsquo;s position provided a political buffer and intermediary with the press, and his irrepressible Irish sentiment offset the president's often dour Scotch disposition.[114]Another close member of his personal staff was his physician, Navy medical officer Cary T. Grayson, who familiarized himself with the president's medical history and confirmed the circulatory problem and hardening of the arteries.[115]Wilson pioneered twice-weekly press conferences in the White House. Though they were modestly effective, the president prohibited his being quoted and was particularly indeterminate in his statements.[116]The first such press conference was on March&#160;15, 1913, when reporters were allowed to ask him questions.[117]In 1913, he also became the first president to deliver theState of the Union addressin person since 1801 whenThomas Jeffersondiscontinued this practice.Wilson, the only Democrat besidesGrover Clevelandto be elected president since 1856, recognized his Party's need for high-level federal patronage.[118]Wilson was also the first Southerner elected to the White House since 1869 and worked closely with Southern Democrats. In Wilson's first month in office Postmaster GeneralAlbert S. Burlesonand Treasury Secretary William G. McAdoo permitted lower-level officials to racially segregate employees in those departments. Segregation in the federal government, which had begun earlier, now accelerated in accord with predominant public opinion.[119]Heckscher argues that Wilson had indeed promised to deal generously with racial injustices, but did not deliver on these assurances, out of concern for his considerable legislative agenda.[120]Wilson primes the economic pump with tariff, currency and anti-trust laws 1913In an early and instructive foreign policy matter, Wilson responded to an angry protest by the Japanese when the state of California proposed legislation which excluded the Japanese from land ownership in the state. Wilson was reticent to assert federal supremacy over the state's legislation. There was talk of war and some argument within the cabinet for a show of naval force, which Wilson firmly rebuffed; after diplomatic exchanges the scare subsided. Japan wanted a treaty (beyond theRoot&ndash;Takahira Agreementthen in place) but none was negotiated; Japanese anger and humiliation remained high for this and other reasons for decades to come.[121][122]In implementing economic policy, Wilson had to transcend the sharply opposing policy views of the Southern and agrarian wing of the Democratic Party led by Bryan, and the pro-business and Northern wing led by urban political bosses&mdash;Tammany in New York, Sullivan in Chicago and Smith and Nugent in Newark.[123]In his Columbia lectures of 1907 Wilson had said "the whole art of statesmanship is the art of bringing the several parts of government into effective cooperation for the accomplishment of particular common objects".[123]As he took up the first item of his "New Freedom" agenda&mdash;lowering the tariffs&mdash;he quite adroitly applied this artistry. With large Democratic majorities in Congress and a healthy economy, he promptly seized the opportunity to effectuate his agenda.[124]Wilson also made quick work of realizing his pledges to beef upantitrustregulation and to bring reform to banking and currency matters.[125]While Wilson was busy with his prodigious legislative agenda, Ellen spent the summer and fall months of 1913 in Cornish, NH where she reprised her painting and was quite delighted doing so. She completed a number of New Hampshire landscapes which matched or exceeded the skills she had displayed up to that time. Though Wilson travelled to Cornish for brief visits, they both bemoaned their extended separation and frequently exchanged letters reflecting this and their affection for one another.[126]Tariff legislationTo facilitate reduction of the tariffs, Wilson garnered unexpected support from a previous rivalOscar Underwood, Chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee, andSen. Furnifold M. Simmons, Chairman of the Senate Finance Committee.[127]In May&#160;1913, theUnderwood Tariffpassed in the House by a vote of 274 to 5; it would take a bit longer passing in the Senate&mdash;in September&mdash;and was signed by Wilson three weeks later.[128]Its effects were soon overwhelmed by the changes in trade caused by World War I.[129]Wilson mobilized public opinion behind the tariff changes by denouncing corporate lobbyists in an address to Congress, and by staging an elaborate signing ceremony.[130]The revenue lost by the lower tariff was replaced by a new federal income tax, authorized by the16th Amendment.Federal Reserve SystemMap of Federal Reserve Districts&ndash;black circles, Federal Reserve Banks&ndash;black squares, District branches&ndash;red circles and Washington HQ&ndash;star/black circleWilson had not waited for completion of the tariff legislation to proceed with his next item of reform&mdash;banking&mdash;which he initiated in June&#160;1913.[131]After consulting with Brandeis, Wilson declared the banking system must be "public not private, must be vested in the government itself so that the banks must be the instruments, not the masters, of business."[132]He tried to find a middle ground between conservative Republicans, led by SenatorNelson W. Aldrich, and the powerful left wing of the Democratic party, led byWilliam Jennings Bryan, who strenuously denounced private banks andWall Street. The latter group wanted a government-ownedcentral bankthat could print paper money as Congress required. The compromise, based on the Aldrich Plan but sponsored by Democratic CongressmenCarter GlassandRobert Owen, allowed the private banks to control the 12 regionalFederal Reserve Banks, but appeased the agrarians by placing controlling interest in the System in a central board appointed by the president with Senate approval. Moreover, Wilson convinced Bryan's supporters that because Federal Reserve notes were obligations of the government, the plan met their demands for an elastic currency. Having 12 regional banks, with designated geographic districts, was meant to weaken the influence of the powerful New York banks, a key demand of Bryan's allies in the South and West, and was a key factor in winning Glass' support.[133]TheFederal Reserve Actpassed in December&#160;1913.[134]Wilson namedPaul Warburgand other prominent bankers to direct the new system. While power was supposed to be decentralized, the New York branch dominated the Fed as the "first among equals".[135]The new system began operations in 1915 and played a major role in financing theAlliedand American war effort.[136]The strengthening of the Federal Reserve was later a major accomplishment of theNew Deal.[137]At the end of 1913, summing up the president's efficacy, the Saturday Evening Post stated, "This administration is Woodrow Wilson's and non-other's. He is the top, middle and bottom of it. There is not an atom of divided responsibility&hellip; the Democratic Party revolves about him. He is the center of it&mdash;the biggest Democrat in the country&mdash;the leader and the chief".[138]Antitrust and other measuresWilson began pushing for legislation which culminated with the Federal Trade Commission Act signed in September&#160;1914. In doing so, Wilson broke with his predecessors' practice of litigating the antitrust issue in the courts, known astrust-busting; the newFederal Trade Commissionprovided a new regulatory approach, to encourage competition and reduce perceived unfair trade practices.[139]In addition, he pushed through Congress theClayton Antitrust Actmaking certain business practices illegal, such asprice discrimination, agreements prohibiting retailers from handling other companies' products, and directorates and agreements to control other companies. The power of this legislation was greater than that of previousanti-trustlaws since it dictated accountability of individual corporate officers and clarified guidelines. This law was considered the "Magna Carta" of labor bySamuel Gompersbecause it ended union liability antitrust laws. In 1916, under threat of a national railroad strike, Wilson approved legislation that increased wages and cut working hours of railroad employees; there was no strike.[140]In the summer of 1914 Wilson gained repeal of toll exemptions at the Panama Canal for American ships; this was received positively by the international community, as a cessation of past discrimination against foreign commerce. The measure was considered unpatriotic by U.S. business interests and opponents such as Tammany Hall.[141]With the President reaching out to new constituencies, a series of programs were targeted at farmers. TheSmith&ndash;Lever Act of 1914created the modern system of agricultural extension agents sponsored by the state agricultural colleges. The agents taught new techniques to farmers. The 1916Federal Farm Loan Actprovided for issuance of low-cost long-term mortgages to farmers.[142]Child laborwas curtailed by theKeating&ndash;Owen Actof 1916, but theU.S. Supreme Courtdeclared it unconstitutional in 1918. No major child labor prohibition would take effect until the 1930s.[143]Mexican RevolutionIn October&#160;1913 when Mexico's presidentVictoriano Huertasummarily dissolved the Mexican Congress, Wilson withdrew diplomatic recognition, in an attempt to isolate him globally using a policy called "watchful waiting&rdquo;.[144]This attempt appeared to be succeeding, with Britain and Germany for example, until Wilson removed an embargo on the shipment of arms to Huerta&rsquo;s opposition, the Constitutionalists, led byVenustiano Carranza; this was considered too destabilizing, and strengthened support for the existing government.[145]Wilson defended his action, "we are the friends of constitutional government...because in no other way can our neighbors work out their own development in peace and liberty". Wilson appeared to contradict himself soon after, telling the British ambassador that political stability in Mexico could only be achieved when a fair distribution of land was carried out. Wilson's ambiguity led to his being misunderstood and even mocked in regard to the matter.[144]After a U.S. naval crew was briefly detained at Tampico disagreements intensified. Wilson received approval from the Congress to use military force if needed and later ordered an occupation of Vera Cruz, incorrectly assuming there would be little opposition. In fact, the action resulted in fatalities&mdash;126 Mexicans and 19 Americans&mdash;and Wilson's reputation as a statesman suffered severely for a time both at home and abroad.[146]His miscalculation may well have resulted from his wife Ellen's failing health at the time, which weighed heavily upon him. Wilson gladly accepted the offer of the so-called ABC powers&mdash;Argentina, Brazil and Chile&mdash;to mediate the Mexican dispute. With the negotiations prolonged in Niagara Falls, under mounting pressure Huerta fled to Spain and a month later Carranza victoriously entered Mexico City. Though the administration had achieved the desired result, it was a pyrrhic victory, as Carranza's lieutenant,Pancho Villa, presented a more serious threat in 1916.[147]Miners strike, wife's death and remarriageIn a 1914 dispute between Colorado miners and theircompany, a confrontation resulted in theLudlow Massacre&mdash;the deaths of eight strikers, eleven children and two mothers. Part ownerJohn D. Rockefeller, Jr.refused Wilson's offer of mediation, conditioned upon collective bargaining, so Wilson sent in U.S. troops. While Wilson succeeded in bringing order to the situation, and demonstrated support for the labor union, the miners' unconditional surrender to the implacable owners was a defeat for Wilson.[148]Wilson's second wife Edith BollingHis wife Ellen's failing health, due tokidney failure, worsened in the spring of 1914; after a fall, she was bedridden, then rallied briefly, but Wilson wrote "my dear one&hellip; grows weaker and weaker, with a pathetic patience and sweetness." He was at her bedside to the end, which came August&#160;6, when Wilson despairingly said "Oh my God, what am I to do." Wilson later wrote accurately of his mourning and depression, "Of course you know what has happened to me&hellip;God has stricken me almost beyond what I can bear". Six months of depression followed for him, though mourning continued. At the same time that Wilson's private world shattered, World War I broke out in Europe, and this momentously changed his political life.[149]In January&#160;1915, Wilson emerged from his depression during a spirited speech in Indianapolis where he said, "the trouble with the Republican Party is that it has not had a new idea for thirty years&hellip; the Republican Party is still a covert and a refuge for those who are afraid, for those who want to consult their grandfathers about everything."[150]Another sign of Wilson&rsquo;s emotional restoration was the aggressiveness with which he pursued passage of a ship-purchase bill to bulk up the inadequately equipped merchant marine. This lasted until March&#160;1915, when he moderated, drew back from the bill and, without its passage, congratulated the Congress for its work in the session just ended&mdash;his initial journey through mourning was evident.[151]In February&#160;1915 Wilson had metEdith Bolling Galt, an attractive southern widow and jeweler. After several meetings, he fell in love, and in May, Wilson proposed. He was rebuffed initially but Wilson was undeterred and the courtship continued.[152]Edith initially did not pursue the furtherance of their physical interaction with the vigor of Wilson, but she gradually warmed to the relationship and they became secretly engaged in the fall of 1915.[153]Many in Wilson's camp had become concerned about the appearance of a premature romance soon after the death of his wife; the engagement was made public in October and they were married on December&#160;18.[154]World War I, 1914&ndash;1916From 1914 until early 1917 Wilson's primary objective was to keep America out of thewar in Europe, and his policy was, "the true spirit of neutrality, which is the spirit of impartiality and fairness and friendliness to all concerned."[155]Wilson addressed the Congress in 1914, "Such divisions amongst us would be fatal to our peace of mind and might seriously stand in the way of the proper performance of our duty as the one great nation at peace, the one people holding itself ready to play a part of impartial mediation and speak the counsels of peace and accommodation, not as a partisan, but as a friend."[156]He made numerous offers to mediate and sentColonel Houseon diplomatic missions; however, theAlliesand theCentral Powersdismissed the overtures. Wilson even thought it counterproductive to comment on atrocities by either side; this led to assertions of heartlessness on his part.[157]Republicans, led byTheodore Roosevelt, criticized Wilson's refusal to build up theU.S. Armyin anticipation of war, but Wilson retained the support of the peace element, including women and the religious.Wilson and "Jingo", the American War Dog &ndash; depicts hawks wanting the U.S. to enter World War IBritaindeclared a blockade of neutral ships carrying contraband goods to Germany. Wilson mildly protested non-lethal British violations of neutral rights; the British knew it wasn't acasus bellifor the U.S.[158]In early 1915 Germany declared the waters around Great Britain to be a war zone; Wilson dispatched a note of protest, imposing "strict accountability" on Germany for the safety of neutral ships. The meaning of the policy, dubiously applied to specific incidents, evolved with the policy of neutrality, but ultimately formed the substance of U.S. responses over the next two years.[159]The commercial British steamshipFalabawas sunk in March&#160;1915 by a German submarine with the loss of 111 lives, including one American in theThrasher Incident. Wilson chose to avoid risking escalation of the war as a result of the loss of one American.[159]In the spring of 1915 a German bomb struck an American ship, theCushingand a German submarine torpedoed an American tanker, theGulflight. Wilson took the view, based on some reasonable evidence, that both incidents were accidental, and that a settlement of claims could be postponed to the end of the war.[160]A German submarine torpedoed and sank the British ocean linerRMS Lusitaniain May&#160;1915; over a thousand perished, including many Americans. In a Philadelphia speech that weekend Wilson said, "There is such a thing as a man being too proud to fight. There is such a thing as a nation being so right that it does not need to convince others by force that it is right". Many reacted to these remarks with contempt.[161]Wilson sent a subdued note to the Germans protesting its submarine warfare against commerce; the initial reply was evasive and received in the United States with indignation. Secretary of State Bryan, a dedicated pacifist, sensing the country&rsquo;s path to war, resigned, and was replaced byRobert Lansing. The White Star liner theArabicwas then torpedoed, with two American casualties. The U.S. threatened a diplomatic break unless Germany repudiated the action; the German ambassador then conveyed a note, "liners will not be sunk by our submarines&rdquo;. Wilson had not stopped the submarine campaign, but won agreement that unarmed merchant ships would not be sunk without warning; and most importantly he had kept the U.S. out of the war.[162]Meanwhile, Wilson requested and received funds in the final 1916 appropriations bill to provide for 500,000 troops. It also included a five-year Navy plan for major construction of battleships, cruisers, destroyers and submarines&mdash;showing Wilson's dedication to a big Navy.[163]In March&#160;1916 theSussex, an unarmed ferry under the French flag, was torpedoed in the English Channel and four Americans were counted among the dead; the Germans had flouted the post-Lusitaniaexchanges. The president demanded the Germans reject their submarine tactics.[164]Wilson drew praise when he succeeded in wringing from Germany a pledge to constrain their U-boat warfare to the rules of cruiser warfare. This was a clear departure from existing practices&mdash;a diplomatic concession from which Germany could only more brazenly withdraw, and regrettably did.[165]Coincidentally, early 1916 brought two separate Mexican incidents in which thirty-six Americans were killed by the forces of Pancho Villa; Wilson orderedGen. John Pershingand 4000 troops across the border to reinforce Carranza.[166]In early April, though Villa had not been captured, Pershing's forces had broken up and dispersed his bands; yet, the forces continued their pursuit. Carranza then pivoted against the Americans and accused them of a punitive invasion; a confrontation in Parral resulted in two dead Americans and two wounded, plus hundreds of Mexican casualties. Pershing, recommending the railroads be seized and the country occupied, was ordered by Wilson to withdraw.[167]Wilson made a plea for postwar union in May&#160;1916; his speech recited the right of every nation to its sovereignty, territorial integrity and freedom from aggression. "So sincerely do we believe these things&rdquo;, Wilson said, "that I am sure that I speak the mind and wish of the people of America when I say that the United States is willing to become a partner in any feasible association of nations formed in order to realize these objectives&rdquo;. At home the speech was seen as a turning point in policy. In Europe the words were received by the British and the French without comment. His harshest European critics rightly thought the speech reflected indifference on Wilson&rsquo;s part; indeed, Wilson never wavered from a belief that the war was the result of corrupt European power politics.[168]Wilson made his final offer to mediate peace on December&#160;18, 1916. As a preliminary, he asked both sides to state their minimum terms necessary for future security. TheCentral Powersreplied that victory was certain, and the Allies required the dismemberment of their enemies' empires; no desire for peace existed, and the offer lapsed.[169]Presidential Election of 1916Main article:United States presidential election, 1916Wilson accepts the Democratic Party nomination, 1916Wilson's remarriage rejuvenated his personal aspirations for re-election. Edith Wilson enjoyed, as Ellen never had, the crowds and the power as a close collaborator with her husband.[170]Executive decisions just prior to the campaign also enabled Wilson to bolster his political mastery. He was presented with a vacancy on the Supreme Court, which he succeeded in filling with a controversial nominee, Louis Brandeis, the first Jewish member of the court.[171]Also, in the summer of 1916 the nation&rsquo;s economy was endangered by a railroad strike. The president called the parties to a White House summit in August&mdash;after two days and no results, Wilson proceeded to settle the issue, using the maximum eight hour work day as the linchpin. Once the Congress passed the Adamson bill incorporating the president&rsquo;s proposal, the strike was cancelled. Wilson was praised for averting a national economic disaster, though the law was received with howls from conservatives denouncing a sellout to the unions and a surrender by Congress to an imperious president.[172]In the campaign, McCombs was replaced as chairman of the Democratic Party byVance C. McCormick, a leading progressive, and AmbassadorHenry Morgenthauwas recalled from Turkey to manage campaign finances.[173]"Colonel" House played an important role in the campaign. "He planned its structure; set its tone; helped guide its finance; chose speakers, tactics, and strategy; and, not least, handled the campaign's greatest asset and greatest potential liability: its brilliant but temperamental candidate."[174]Wilson, renominated without opposition, employed his campaign slogan "He kept us out of war", though he never promised unequivocally to stay out of the war. In his acceptance speech on September&#160;2, 1916, Wilson pointedly warned Germany that submarine warfare resulting in American deaths would not be tolerated, saying "The nation that violates these essential rights must expect to be checked and called to account by direct challenge and resistance. It at once makes the quarrel in part our own."[175]1916 Electoral Vote MapAs the Party platform was drafted, Senator Owen of Oklahoma urged Wilson to take ideas from the Progressive Party platform of 1912 &ldquo;as a means of attaching to our party progressive Republicans who are in sympathy with us in so large a degree.&rdquo; At Wilson's request, Owen highlighted federal legislation to promote workers&rsquo; health and safety, prohibit child labour, provideunemployment compensationand establish minimum wages and maximum hours. Wilson, in turn, included in his draft platform a plank that called for all work performed by and for the federal government to provide a minimum wage, an eight-hour day and six-day workweek, health and safety measures, the prohibition of child labour, and (his own additions) safeguards for female workers and a retirement program.[176]Wilson's opponent was RepublicanCharles Evans Hughes, former governor of New York with a progressive record similar to Wilson's as governor of New Jersey. Theodore Roosevelt commented that the only thing different between Hughes and Wilson was a shave. However, Hughes had to try to hold together a coalition of conservative Taft supporters and progressive Roosevelt partisans, and his campaign never assumed a definite form. Wilson ran on his record and ignored Hughes, reserving his attacks for Roosevelt. When asked why he did not attack Hughes directly, Wilson told a friend, "Never murder a man who is committing suicide."[177]The electionoutcome was in doubt for several days and was determined by several close states. Wilson won California by 3,773 of almost a million votes cast, and New Hampshire by 54 votes. Hughes wonMinnesotaby 393 votes out of over 358,000. In the final count, Wilson had 277 electoral votes vs. Hughes's 254. Wilson was able to win by picking up many votes that had gone to Teddy Roosevelt orEugene V. Debsin 1912.[178]By the time Hughes' concession telegram arrived, Wilson commented "it was a little moth-eaten when it got here".[179]In December 1916, a month after his reelection, Wilson (a noted supporter of mother's pensions[180]) addressed a conference on social insurance in which he spoke of how a conference like that gave evidence of &ldquo;the dominant interest of our own time, and one of the best elements of social insurance is social understanding &ndash; an interchange of views and a comprehension of interests which for a long time was only too rare.&rdquo;[181]Second term, 1917&ndash;1921Entry into World War IMain article:American entry into World War IWilson was aggravated with the British for ignoring his suggestion of a postwar league of nations; he also objected to their seizure of mail from neutral ships and their blacklisting of firms trading with Britain's enemies. Wilson insisted a league of nations was the solution to ending the war.[182]Wilson found it increasingly difficult to maintain neutrality, after Germany rescinded earlier promises &mdash; theArabic pledgeand theSussex pledge. Early in 1917 the German ambassadorJohann von Bernstorfinformed Secretary of State Lansing of Germany's commitment to unrestricted submarine warfare; Bernstorff had tears in his eyes as he knew the U.S. reaction would adversely affect his country's lot.[183]Then came the revelation of theZimmermann Telegram, in which Germany attempted to enlist Mexico as an ally, promising Mexico that if Germany was victorious, she would support Mexico in winning back the states of Texas, New Mexico and Arizona from the U.S.[184]Wilson's reaction after consulting the cabinet and the Congress was a minimal one &mdash; that diplomatic relations with the Germans be brought to a halt. The president said, "We are the sincere friends of the German people and earnestly desire to remain at peace with them. We shall not believe they are hostile to us unless or until we are obliged to believe it".[185]In March&#160;1917 several American ships were sunk by Germany and Teddy Roosevelt reacted, "if he does not go to war I shall skin him alive&rdquo;.[186]Wilson called a cabinet meeting on March&#160;20, in which the vote was unanimous for war.[187]Gen. John J. PershingColonel HouseWilson delivered hisWar Messageto a special session of Congress on April&#160;2, 1917, declaring that Germany's latest pronouncement had rendered his "armed neutrality" policy untenable and asking Congress to declare Germany's war stance was an act of war.[188]He proposed the United States enter the war to "vindicate principles of peace and justice in the life of the world as against selfish and autocratic power". The German government, Wilson said, "means to stir up enemies against us at our very doors". He then also warned that "if there should be disloyalty, it will be dealt with a firm hand of repression."[189]Wilson closed with the following, "We have no quarrel with the German people. We have no feeling towards them but one of sympathy and friendship. We are glad to fight for the ultimate peace of the world&hellip; the German people included: for the rights of nations great and small and for the privilege of men everywhere to choose their way of life and obedience. The world must be made safe for democracy".[190]Thedeclaration of war by the United Statesagainst Germany passed Congress by strong bipartisan majorities on April&#160;4, 1917, with opposition from ethnic German strongholds and remote rural areas in the South. It was signed by Wilson on April&#160;6, 1917. The U.S. did not sign a formal alliance with Britain or France but operated as an "associated" power&mdash;an informal ally with military cooperation through the Supreme War Council in London.[191]The U.S. raised a massive army throughconscriptionand Wilson gave command to GeneralJohn J. Pershing, with complete authority as to tactics, strategy and some diplomacy.[192]Edward M. House, Wilson's key unofficial foreign affairs advisor, became the president's main channel of communication with the British government, andWilliam Wiseman, a British naval attach, was House&rsquo;s principal contact in England. Their personal relationship succeeded in serving the powers well, by overcoming strained relations in order to achieve essential understandings between the two governments. House also became the U.S. representative on the Allies' Supreme War Council.[193]March&#160;1917 also brought the first of two revolutions in Russia, which impacted the strategic role of the U.S. in the war. The overthrow of the imperial government removed a serious barrier to America's entry into the European conflict, while the second revolution in November relieved the Germans of a major threat on their eastern front, and allowed them to dedicate more troops to the Western front, thus making U.S. forces central to Allied success in battles of 1918. Wilson initially rebuffed pleas from the Allies to dedicate military resources to an intervention in Russia against theBolsheviks, based partially on his experience from attempted intervention in Mexico; nevertheless he ultimately was convinced of the potential benefit and agreed to dispatch a limited force to assist the Allies on the eastern front.[194]The Germans launched an offensive atArraswhich prompted an accelerated deployment of troops by Wilson to the Western front&mdash;by August&#160;1918 a million American troops had reached France.[195]The Allies initiated a counter offensive atSommeand by August the Germans had lost the military initiative and an Allied victory was in sight. In October came a message from the new German ChancellorPrince Max of Badento Wilson requesting a general armistice.[196]In the exchange of notes with Germany they agreed the Fourteen Points in principle be incorporated in the armistice; House then procured agreement from France and Britain, but only after threatening to conclude a unilateral armistice without them.[197]Wilson ignored Gen. Pershing's plea to drop the armistice and instead demand an unconditional surrender by Germany.[198]Home frontMain article:United States home front during World War ILiberty Loan drive in front of City Hall,New Orleans. On City Hall is a banner reading "Food will win the war &ndash; don't waste it".Women workers in ordnance shops, Pennsylvania, 1918TheWar Industries Board, headed byBernard Baruch, was established to set U.S. war manufacturing policies and goals; future PresidentHerbert Hooverlead theFood Administration, to conserve food; theFederal Fuel Administration, run by Henry Garfield, introduceddaylight saving timeand rationed fuel supplies; William McAdoo was in charge of war bond efforts and Vance McCormick headed the War Trade Board. All of the above, known collectively as the "war cabinet", met weekly with Wilson at the White House.[199]These and other bodies were headed by businessmen recruited by Wilson for a-dollar-a-day salary to make the government more efficient in the war effort.[200]More favorable treatment was extended to those unions that supported the U.S. war effort, such as theAmerican Federation of Labor(AFL). Wilson worked closely withSamuel Gompersand the AFL, the railroad brotherhoods, and other 'moderate' unions, which saw enormous growth in membership and wages during Wilson's administration.[201]In the absence of rationing consumer prices soared; income taxes also increased and workers suffered. Despite this, appeals to buywar bondswere highly successful. The purchase of wartime bonds had the result of shifting the cost of the war to the taxpayers of the affluent 1920s.[200]Antiwar groups, anarchists,communists,Industrial Workers of the Worldmembers, and other antiwar groups attempting to sabotage the war effort were targeted by theDepartment of Justice; many of their leaders were arrested for incitement to violence, espionage, orsedition.[202][203]Wilson also established the first western propaganda office, the United StatesCommittee on Public Information, headed byGeorge Creel, the "Creel Commission", which circulated patriotic anti-German appeals and conducted censorship of materials considered seditious.[204]To further counter disloyalty to the war effort at home, Wilson pushed through Congress theEspionage Act of 1917and theSedition Act of 1918to suppress anti-British, pro-German, or anti-war statements.[189]While he welcomed socialists who supported the war, he pushed at the same time to arrest and deport foreign-born enemies.[202]Many recent immigrants,resident alienswithout U.S. citizenship, who opposed America's participation in the war were deported to Soviet Russia or other nations under the powers granted in theImmigration Act of 1918.[202][203][205]In an effort at reform and to shake up his Mobilization program, Wilson removed the chief of the Army Signal Corps and the chairman of the Aircraft Production Board on April&#160;18, 1918.[206]On May&#160;16, the President launched an investigation, headed byRepublicanCharles Evans Hughes, into the War Department and the Council of Defense.[207]The Hughes report released on October&#160;31 found no major corruption violations or theft in Wilson's Mobilization program, although the report found incompetence in the aircraft program.[208]With congressional elections approaching, in 1918 Wilson made an appeal to the public for the retention of a Democratic majority and this seriously backfired due to its self-serving tone&ndash;Republicans successfully picked up majorities in both houses of Congress.[209]The Fourteen PointsMain article:Fourteen PointsWilson initiated a secret series of studies namedThe Inquiry, primarily focused on Europe, and carried out by a group in New York which included geographers, historians and political scientists; the group was directed by Col. House.[210]The studies culminated in a speech by Wilson to Congress on January&#160;8, 1918, wherein he articulated America's long term war objectives. It was the clearest expression of intention made by any of the belligerent nations. The speech, known as the Fourteen Points, was authored mainly byWalter Lippmannand projected Wilson's progressive domestic policies into the international arena. The first six dealt with diplomacy, freedom of the seas and settlement of colonial claims. Then territorial issues were addressed and the final point, the establishment of an association of nations to guarantee the independence and territorial integrity of all nations&mdash;a League of Nations. The address was translated into many languages for global dissemination.[211]Peace Conference 1919Main article:Paris Peace Conference, 1919The &ldquo;Big Four&rdquo; at the Paris Peace Conference in 1919, following the end of World War I. Wilson is standing next toGeorges Clemenceauat right.When the time came, Wilson spent six months in Paris for the Peace Conference&mdash;thereby the first U.S. president to travel to Europe while in office, and the first to visit the Pope.[212]Wilson disembarked from theGeorge Washingtonin Brest on December&#160;13; he took a break from the negotiations and departed February&#160;14, 1919 for home, then returned to Paris three weeks later and remained until the conclusion of a treaty in June.[213]Heckscher describes Wilson, during the first four weeks of the Conference as, &ldquo;playing, with force and discretion, a commanding role&hellip;he established his priorities, secured accommodation on major issues and won preliminary acceptance of the League.[214]He promoted his plan in France, and then at home in February. Wilson gave a speech at the Metropolitan Opera House in defense of the League&mdash;he was more insistent about it than ever. Heckscher contends that the enduring image of Wilson as a grim, unsmiling and unforgiving figure dates from this visit home during the conference.[215]While the general public along with editorial writers, churches and peace groups generally favored the League, the Republicans vowed to defeat the League and discredit Wilson.[216]Wilson notably did not address the Congress as to ongoing deliberations at the peace conference, as indeed his counterpart Lloyd George did with Parliament. Heckscher opines that this was a missed opportunity to forge the debate even though the Congressional majority had changed. In France he was without the usual control over his message through the media; in fact, the French initiated an aggressive propaganda campaign in the midst of the Conference to effect its outcome.[217]At the conclusion of the visit home Wilson suffered an illness en route to France; the ensuing months brought a decline in health and in power and prestige. On arrival, it was immediately clear the conference had struggled in his absence&mdash;Col. House had compromised Wilson's prior gains, and Wilson set out to attempt to regain the lost ground.[218]During these "dark days" of the conference Taft cabled to Wilson three proposed amendments to the League covenant which he thought would considerably increase its acceptability to the Europeans&mdash;the right of withdrawal from the League, the exemption of domestic issues from the League and the inviolability of the Monroe Doctrine. Wilson very reluctantly accepted these amendments, explaining why he later was more inflexible in the Senate treaty negotiations.[219]On April&#160;3 Wilson fell violently ill during a conference meeting, in a narrow escape from influenza. Though his symptoms receded within a couple of days, those around him noticed a distinct, lasting deterioration.[220]The charter of the proposed League of Nations was incorporated into the conference'sTreaty of Versailles.[221]Japan proposed that the Covenant include aracial equality clause. Wilson was indifferent to the issue, but acceded to strong opposition from Australia and Britain.[222]After the conference, Wilson said that "at last the world knows America as the savior of the world!"[223]For his peace-making efforts, Wilson was awarded the 1919Nobel Peace Prize.[7]John Maynard Keynes, an anti-Wilson and anti-League intellectual, asserted Wilson was not well regarded at the Conference, "...he was in many respects...ill-informed as to European conditions...his mind was slow and unadaptable...There can seldom have been a statesman of the first rank more incompetent than the President in the agilities of the council chamber."[224]Keynes' highly regarded rhetoric became the prevailing judgment of the conference for decades.[225]Treaty fight, 1919Wilson returning from the Versailles Peace Conference, 1919.The chances were less than favorable for ratification of the treaty by a two-thirds vote of the Republican Senate. Public opinion was mixed, with intense opposition from most Republicans, Germans, and Irish Catholic Democrats. In numerous meetings with Senators, Wilson discovered opposition had hardened. Despite his weakened physical condition Wilson decided to barnstorm the Western states, scheduling 29 major speeches and many short ones to rally support.[226]Wilson had earlier downplayedGermany's as guilt in starting the warby calling for "peace without victory", but he had taken an increasingly hard stand at Paris and rejected advice to soften the treaty's treatment of Germany.[227]In a reversal of his earlier position, in summer 1919 Wilson repeatedly stressed Germany's guilt, saying the treaty, "seeks to punish one of the greatest wrongs ever done in history, the wrong which Germany sought to do to the world and to civilization; and there ought to be no weak purpose with regard to the application of the punishment. She attempted an intolerable thing,and she must be made to pay for the attempt."[228]Wilson had a series of debilitating strokes and had to cut short his trip on September&#160;26, 1919. He became an invalid in the White House, closely monitored by his wife, who insulated him from negative news and downplayed for him the gravity of his condition.[229]Senator Lodge led the opposition to the treaty in the Republican controlled Senate; the key point of disagreement was whether the League would diminish the power of Congress to declare war.It proved possible to build a majority for the treaty in the Senate, but the two-thirds coalition needed to ratify was insurmountable.[230]One block of Democrats strongly supported the Versailles Treaty; a second group supported the Treaty but followed Wilson in opposing any amendments or reservations. The largest bloc&mdash;Lodge and the Republicans&mdash;wanted a treaty with reservations, especially on Article X, which empowered the League of Nations to make war without a vote by the United States Congress. Finally, a bipartisan group of 13 "irreconcilables" opposed a treaty in any form.[231]In mid-November&#160;1919 Lodge and his Republicans formed a coalition with the pro-Treaty Democrats, and were close to a two-thirds majority for a Treaty with reservations; but the seriously indisposed Wilson rejected this compromise and enough Democrats followed his lead to defeat ratification. Cooper and Bailey suggest that Wilson's stroke in September had debilitated him from negotiating effectively with Lodge.[232]Post war: 1919&ndash;1920Wilson's administration did effectively demobilize the country at the war's end. A plan to form a commission for the purpose was abandoned in the face of Republican control the Senate, which complicated the appointment of commission members. Instead, Wilson favored the prompt dismantling of wartime boards and regulatory agencies.[233]Demobilization was chaotic and violent; four million soldiers were sent home with little planning, little money, few benefits, and other vague promises. A wartime bubble in prices of farmland burst, leaving many farmers deeply in debt after they purchased new land. Major strikes in the steel, coal, and meatpacking industries disrupted the economy in 1919.[234]Racial animosity erupted in seriousrace riotsof ethnic whites against blacks inChicago,Omaha, and two dozen other major cities in the North.[235]As the election of 1920 approached, Wilson momentarily imagined that a deadlocked Democratic convention might nominate him for a third term with a campaign focused on the League of Nations. No one around the President adequately clarified for him that he was too incapacitated, had insufficient support, and that the League defeat was irreversible.[236]In retirement, Wilson harbored hopes for a White House run in 1924 despite the absence of substantial support.[237]Other foreign affairsWilson frequently intervened in Latin American affairs, saying in 1913: "I am going to teach the South American republics to elect good men."[238]These interventions included Mexico in 1914,Haiti, Dominican Republic in 1916, Cuba in 1917, andPanamain 1918. The U.S. maintained troops inNicaraguathroughout the Wilson administration and used them to select the president of Nicaragua and then to force Nicaragua to pass theBryan-Chamorro Treaty. American troops in Haiti, under the command of the federal government, forced the Haitian legislature to choose as Haitian president the candidate Wilson selected.[239]Wilson ordered the military occupation of theDominican Republicshortly after the resignation of its PresidentJuan Isidro Jimenes Pereyrain 1916. The U.S. military worked in concert with wealthy Dominican landowners to suppress thegavilleros, acampesinoguerrillaforce fighting the occupation. The occupation lasted until 1924, and was notorious for its brutality against those in the resistance.[240]Wilson also negotiated a treaty with Colombia in which the U.S. apologized for its role in the Panama Revolution of 1903&ndash;1904.[241]After Russia left World War I following theBolshevik Revolutionof 1917, the Allies sent troops there to prevent a German orBolsheviktakeover of allied-provided weapons, munitions and other supplies previously shipped as aid to the pre-revolutionary government.[242]Wilson sent armed forces to assist the withdrawal ofCzechoslovak Legionsalong theTrans-Siberian Railway, and to hold key port cities atArkangelandVladivostok. Though specifically instructed not to engage the Bolsheviks, the U.S. forces engaged in several armed conflicts against forces of the new Russian government. Revolutionaries in Russia resented the American intrusion. As Robert Maddox puts it, "The immediate effect of the intervention was to prolong a bloody civil war, thereby costing thousands of additional lives and wreaking enormous destruction on an already battered society."[243]Wilson withdrew most of the soldiers on April&#160;1, 1920, though some remained until as late as 1922.In 1919, Wilson guided American foreign policy to "acquiesce" in theBalfour Declarationwithout supporting Zionism in an official way. Wilson expressed sympathy for the plight of Jews, especially in Poland and in France.[244]In May&#160;1920, Wilson sent a long-deferred proposal to Congress to have the U.S. accept amandate from the League of Nationsto take overArmenia.[245]Bailey notes this was opposed by American public opinion,[246]whileRichard G. Hovannisianstates that Wilson "made all the wrong arguments" for the mandate and focused less on the immediate policy than on how history would judge his actions: "[he] wished to place it clearly on the record that the abandonment of Armenia was not his doing."[247]The resolution won the votes of only 23 senators.IncapacityThe immediate cause of Wilson's incapacity in September&#160;1919 was the physical strain of the public speaking tour he undertook in support of ratification of the Treaty of Versailles. InPueblo, Colorado, on September&#160;25, 1919, he collapsed and never fully recovered.[248]On October&#160;2, 1919, he suffered a serious stroke, leaving him paralyzed on his left side, and with only partial vision in the right eye.[249]He was confined to bed for weeks and sequestered from everyone except his wife and physician, Dr.Cary Grayson.[250]For some months he used a wheelchair and later he required use of a cane. His wife and aideJoe Tumultywere said to have helped a journalist, Louis Seibold, present a false account of an interview with the President.[251]He was insulated by his wife, who selected matters for his attention and delegated others to his cabinet. Wilson temporarily resumed a perfunctory attendance at cabinet meetings.[252]By February&#160;1920, the President's true condition was public. Many expressed qualms about Wilson's fitness for the presidency at a time when the League fight was reaching a climax, and domestic issues such as strikes, unemployment, inflation and the threat of Communism were ablaze. No one, including his wife, his physician, or personal assistant, was willing to take upon themselves responsibility for the certification, required by the Constitution, of his "inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office".[253]This complex case became a motivation for passage of the25th Amendment.[254]Woman's suffrageWilson favoredwoman suffrageat the state level, but held off support for a nationwide constitutional amendment because his party was sharply divided, with the South opposing an amendment on the grounds of state's rights. In any case, the only Southern state to give its women the vote wasArkansas. TheNational Woman's Party(NWP) in 1917-1919 launched a highly visible campaign attacking Wilson and his party for not enacting an amendment. Wilson, however, kept in close touch with the much larger and more moderate suffragists of theNational American Woman Suffrage Association. He continued to hold off until he was sure the Democratic Party in the North was supportive; the 1917 referendum in New York State in favor of suffrage proved decisive for him. In January&#160;1918, Wilson went in person to the House and made a strong and widely published appeal to the House to pass the bill. It passed but the Senate stalled until 1919, then finally sent the amendment to the states for ratification.[255]Behn argues that:The National American Woman Suffrage Association, not the National Woman&rsquo;s Party, was decisive in Wilson&rsquo;s conversion to the cause of the federal amendment because its approach mirrored his own conservative vision of the appropriate method of reform: win a broad consensus, develop a legitimate rationale, and make the issue politically valuable. Additionally, I contend that Wilson did have a significant role to play in the successful congressional passage and national ratification of the 19th Amendment.[256]Civil rightsSeveral historians have criticized a number of Wilson's policies on racial grounds.[257][258][259][260][261][262]According to critics, Wilson believed that slavery was wrong on economic labor grounds, rather than for moral reasons.[262]They also argue that he idealized the slavery system in the South, viewing masters as patient with "indolent" slaves.[262]In terms ofReconstruction, they argue that Wilson held the common southern view that the South was demoralized by Northerncarpetbaggersand that overreach on the part of theRadical Republicansjustified extreme measures to reassert Democratic national and state governments.[263][264]Wilson's War Department drafted hundreds of thousands of blacks into the army, giving them equal pay with whites, but in accord with military policy from the Civil War through the Second World War, kept them in all-black units with white officers, and kept the great majority out of combat.[265]When a delegation of blacks protested the discriminatory actions, Wilson told them "segregation is not a humiliation but a benefit, and ought to be so regarded by you gentlemen." In 1918,W. E. B. Du Bois&mdash;a leader of theNAACPwho had campaigned for Wilson&mdash;was offered an Army commission in charge of dealing with race relations; DuBois accepted, but he failed his Army physical and did not serve.[266]While president ofPrinceton University, Wilson had discouraged blacks from applying for admission, preferring to keep the peace among white students and alumni.[267]Wilson'sHistory of the American People(1901) explained theKu Klux Klanof the late 1860s as a lawless reaction to a lawless period. Wilson wrote that the Klan "began to attempt by intimidation what they were not allowed to attempt by the ballot or by any ordered course of public action".[268]Cabinet heads appointed by President Wilson re-segregated restrooms and cafeterias in their buildings. Wilson showed the filmBirth of a Nationin the White House. The film praised the Ku Klux Klan and portrayed blacks as uncouth and uncivilized. Wilson, who did not know the nature of the film beforehand, never praised the film and considered it to be "a very unfortunate production."[269]During Wilson's term, the government began requiring photographs of all applicants for federal jobs. He told black leaders that he sincerely believed this was in their interest.[270]Administration and CabinetWilson's chief of staff ("Secretary") wasJoseph Patrick Tumultyfrom 1913 to 1921, but he was largely upstaged after 1916 when Wilson's second wife, Edith Bolling Galt Wilson, assumed full control of Wilson's schedule. The most important foreign policy advisor and confidant was "Colonel"Edward M. Houseuntil Wilson broke with him in early 1919, for his missteps at the peace conference in Wilson's absence.[271]Woodrow Wilson and his cabinet in the Cabinet RoomThe Wilson CabinetOfficeNameTermPresidentWoodrow Wilson1913&ndash;1921Vice PresidentThomas R. Marshall1913&ndash;1921Secretary of StateWilliam J. Bryan1913&ndash;1915Robert Lansing1915&ndash;1920Bainbridge Colby1920&ndash;1921Secretary of TreasuryWilliam G. McAdoo1913&ndash;1918Carter Glass1918&ndash;1920David F. Houston1920&ndash;1921Secretary of WarLindley M. Garrison1913&ndash;1916Newton D. Baker1916&ndash;1921Attorney GeneralJames C. McReynolds1913&ndash;1914Thomas W. Gregory1914&ndash;1919A. Mitchell Palmer1919&ndash;1921Postmaster GeneralAlbert S. Burleson1913&ndash;1921Secretary of the NavyJosephus Daniels1913&ndash;1921Secretary of the InteriorFranklin K. Lane1913&ndash;1920John B. Payne1920&ndash;1921Secretary of AgricultureDavid F. Houston1913&ndash;1920Edwin T. Meredith1920&ndash;1921Secretary of CommerceWilliam C. Redfield1913&ndash;1919Joshua W. Alexander1919&ndash;1921Secretary of LaborWilliam B. Wilson1913&ndash;1921Judicial appointmentsJustice Louis BrandeisMain article:List of federal judges appointed by Woodrow WilsonSupreme CourtWilson appointed three Associate Justices to theSupreme Court of the United States:James Clark McReynoldsin 1914. A conservative, he served more than 26 years and opposed theNew Deal.Louis Dembitz Brandeisin 1916. A liberal, and the first Jew appointed to the Court, he served 22 years and wrote landmark opinions on free speech and right to privacy.John Hessin Clarkein 1916. He served just 6 years on the Court before resigning. He thoroughly disliked his work as an Associate Justice.Other courtsAlong with his Supreme Court appointments, Wilson appointed 20 judges to theUnited States Courts of Appealsand 52 judges to theUnited States district courts.Final years and deathThe final resting place of Woodrow Wilson at theWashington National CathedralAfter the end of his second term in 1921, Wilson and his wife moved from the White House to an elegant 1915 town house in theEmbassy Row(Kalorama) section of Washington, D.C.[272]Wilson continued daily drives, and attended Keith'svaudevilletheatre on Saturday nights. Wilson was one of only two U.S. Presidents (Theodore Rooseveltwas the first) to have served as president of theAmerican Historical Association.[273]On November&#160;10, 1923, Wilson made a short Armistice Day radio speech from the library of his home, his last national address. The following day he spoke briefly from the front steps to more than 20,000 well wishers gathered outside the house.[272][274][275]On February&#160;3, 1924, Wilson died at home of a stroke and other heart-related problems at age 67. He was interred in asarcophagusinWashington National Cathedral, the only president interred in Washington, D.C.[276]Mrs. Wilson stayed in the home another 37 years, dying there on December&#160;28, 1961, Wilson's birthday and the day she was to be the guest of honor at the opening of theWoodrow Wilson Bridgeacross thePotomac Rivernear Washington. Mrs. Wilson left the home and much of the contents to theNational Trust for Historic Preservationto be made into a museum honoring her husband. TheWoodrow Wilson Houseopened to the public in 1963, was designated aNational Historic Landmarkin 1964, and was listed on theNational Register of Historic Placesin 1966.[277]Wilson left his daughterMargaretan annuity of $2,500 annually for as long as she remained unmarried, and left to his daughters what had been his first wife's personal property. The rest he left to Edith as a life estate with the provision that at her death, his daughters would divide the estate among themselves.[278]Wilson's presidential papers and his personal library are at theLibrary of Congress.[279]LegacyWilson's portrait on the$100,000 bill.Wilson's Pierce Arrow on display in Staunton, VirginiaIn recognition of his signing on March&#160;2, 1917 the "Jones Act" that granted United States citizenship to Puerto Ricans, streets in several municipalities there were renamed "Calle Wilson", including one in the Mariani neighborhood inPonceand the Condado section ofSan Juan.The largest denomination of U.S. currency ever printed, the$100,000 billbears Wilson's portrait (meant for use only amongFederal Reserve Banks).TheUSSWoodrow Wilson(SSBN-624), a Lafayette-class ballistic missile submarine, was the only ship of the United States Navy to be named for Wilson. She later was converted into an attack submarine and redesignated SSN-624.TheWoodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairswas founded at Princeton in 1930. It was created in the spirit of Wilson's interest in preparing students for leadership in public and international affairs.Shadow Lawn, theSummer White Housefor Wilson during his term in office, became part ofMonmouth Universityin 1956. The college has placed a marker on the building, renamed Woodrow Wilson Hall, commemorating the home. It was declared aNational Historic Landmarkin 1985.In 1944,Darryl F. Zanuckof20th Century Foxproduced a film titledWilson. It looked back with nostalgia to Wilson's presidency, especially concerning his role as commander-in-chief during World War I.A section of the Rambla ofMontevideo, Uruguay, is namedRambla Presidente Wilson. A street in the 16tharrondissementin Paris, running fromTrocadroto the Place de l'Alma, is named the Avenue du Prsident Wilson. The Pont Wilson crosses the Rhne river in the center ofLyon, France. The Boulevard du Prsident Wilson extends from the main train station ofStrasbourgand connects to the Boulevard Clemenceau. InBordeaux, the Boulevard du Prsident Wilson links to the Boulevard George V. The Quai du Prsident Wilson forms part of the port ofMarseille.Praha hlavn ndra&#x17E;, the main railway station ofPraguehas, for much of its history, been known as the "Wilson Station" (Czech: Wilsonovo ndra&#x17E;). TheWoodrow Wilsonsquare&#160;(nl)inGhent,Belgium.In 2010, Wilson was inducted into theNew Jersey Hall of Fame.[280]Named for WilsonTheWoodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars, established by Congress in1968as a "living memorial" to President Wilson, is a leading policy forum in Washington, D.C. and part of theSmithsonian Institution.Wilson College, is one of the five residential colleges atPrinceton UniversityWilson House, an undergraduate dormitory atJohns Hopkins University, is named in his honor.Wilson Hall, an administrative building atJames Madison University, is named in his honor.His portrait appeared on the U.S.$100,000 bill, issued in1934. This bill was used only for transactions between the Federal Reserve and Treasury.Wilson's support for creating the independent state ofCzechoslovakialed to renaming the central railway station inPraguewas renamed from "Franz Joseph Station" to "Wilson Station" (Wilsonovo nadrazi).[281]His name was considered when the new nation of Czechoslovakia was renaming some of its cities.[282]TheAvenue du President Wilsonin Paris, France, is named in honor of Wilson.Boulevard Wilson, a main street inStrasbourg, France, where theEuropean Parliamentis located, is named in honor of Wilson. Anyone arriving by train in Strasbourg will cross or travel on Boulevard Wilson, including those traveling to theEuropean Parliament.Woodrow Wilson Bridgeacross thePotomac Riveron the portion of theCapital Beltwaywhich is alsoInterstate 95is located in Virginia, Maryland, and the District of Columbia.Plac Wilsona, a square in northwesternWarsawThe Woodrow Wilson House is a national historic landmark and house museum that focuses on President Woodrow Wilson's "Washington Years (1912-1924)". The museum promotes a greater awareness of Wilson's public life and ideals for future generations through guided tours, exhibitions and educational programs.[283]WorksWoodrow Wilson was also an accomplished author and scholar, having written numerous books and essays.Books:Congressional Government1885.On Being Human1897.The state: elements of historical and practical politics1898.A History of the American People1902.Constitutional Government in the United States1908.The New Freedom1913.When A Man Comes To Himself1915.Essays:The Study of Administration1887.Leaders of Men1890.MediaPlay mediaWilson tips his hat as he exits the White House on his way to a parade alongPennsylvania Avenue(1918).Play mediaCollection of video clips of the presidentSee alsoWoodrow Wilson International Center for ScholarsWoodrow Wilson Boyhood HomeWoodrow Wilson House (Washington, D.C.)Silent SentinelsDo Your Bit for AmericaHistory of the United States (1865&ndash;1918)History of the United States (1918&ndash;45)Idealism (international relations)List of Presidents of the United StatesList of Presidents of the United States, sortable by previous experienceProgressivism in the United StatesU.S. presidents on U.S. postage stampsList of United States Presidents on currencyBiography portalGovernment of the United States portalNew Jersey portalPolitics portalWorld War I portalNotes^John Milton Cooper,Woodrow Wilson: A Biographyp. 201^Kerr, K. Austin (1967). "Decision For Federal Control: Wilson, McAdoo, and the Railroads, 1917".Journal of American History54(3): 550&ndash;560.doi:10.2307/2937406.JSTOR&#160;2937406.&#160;^Cook, Brian (2007).Democracy and Administration: Woodrow Wilson's Ideas and the Challenges of Public Management. Baltimore: JHU Press. p.&#160;142.ISBN&#160;9780801885228.&#160;^Blum, John Morton (1956).Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality. Boston: Little, Brown.&#160;^Gamble, Richard M. (2001)."Savior Nation: Woodrow Wilson and the Gospel of Service"(PDF).Humanitas14(1): 4&ndash;22.&#160;^Cooper,Woodrow Wilson(2009) p. 560.^ab"Woodrow Wilson bio sketch". Nobel Media AB 2014.&#160;^The other presidents areTheodore RooseveltandBarack Obama.^Heckscher (1991), p. 4.^John Milton Cooper,Woodrow Wilson: A Biography(2009) pp. 13&ndash;19^"Genealogy of President Woodrow Wilson". Wc.rootsweb.ancestry.com. RetrievedSeptember 11,2010.&#160;^Walworth 1958p. 4^ab"Woodrow Wilson &ndash; 28th President, 1913&ndash;1921". PresidentialAvenue.com.&#160;^abWhite, William Allen (March 15, 2007). "Chapter II: The Influence of Environment".Woodrow Wilson &ndash; The Man, His Times and His Task.ISBN&#160;978-1-4067-7685-0.&#160;^Heckscher (1991), p. 23.^Heckscher (1991), p. 22^Walworth ch 1^"Princeton Periodicals &mdash; Daily Princetonian Special Class of 1971, Volume 91, Number 72, Issue 15&#160;June 1967". Theprince.princeton.edu. 1967-06-15. Retrieved2012-09-02.&#160;^Link,WilsonI:5&ndash;6; Wilson Papers I: 130, 245, 314^"Princeton Periodicals &mdash; Daily Princetonian 5&#160;December 1895". Theprince.princeton.edu. Retrieved2012-09-02.&#160;^Heckscher (1991), p. 35.^The World's Work: A History of our Time, Volume IV: November&#160;1911 &ndash; April&#160;1912. Doubleday. 1912. pp.&#160;74&ndash;75.&#160;^Heckscher (1991), p. 53.^Cranston 1945^Heckscher (1991), pp. 58&ndash; 59.^Mulder, John H. (1978).Woodrow Wilson: The Years of Preparation. Princeton. pp.&#160;71&ndash;72.&#160;^Internet Archive:Congressional Government: A Study in American Politics (1885), accessed January&#160;6, 2011^Pestritto, Ronald (2005).Woodrow Wilson and the Roots of Modern Liberalism. Lanham, Maryland: Rowman &amp; Littlefield. p.&#160;34.ISBN&#160;0-7425-1517-6. RetrievedMarch 22,2010.&#160;^Heckscher (1991), pp. 62&ndash;65.^Heckscher, pp. 71&ndash;73.^"The Pierce Arrow Limousine", Woodrow Wilson Presidential Library^Weingroff, Richard F.,"President Woodrow Wilson &ndash; Motorist Extraordinaire", Federal Highway Administration^"By the Numbers" &ndash; 1915,CNNSI, October&#160;17, 2002. Retrieved February&#160;27, 2010.^Wilson, Andrew (1996),A President's Love Affair with the Lake District: Woodrow Wilson's 'Second Home, Lakeland Press Agency^Van Natta, Don Jr. (2003),First Off the Tee: Presidential Hackers, Duffers, and Cheaters from Taft to BushPublicAffairs^Heckscher, pp. 77&ndash;82.^Heckscher, p. 85.^Heckscher, pp. 93&ndash;94.^Heckscher, p. 96.^Heckscher, p. 104.^Heckscher, p. 106.^Walworth, v. 1; Link (1947)^"Beyond FitzRandolph Gates",Princeton Weekly BulletinJune&#160;22, 1998.^The college he was referring to wasCentre College. Link (1947)^The Politics of Woodrow Wilson, 41&ndash;48^Heckscher, pp. 75&ndash;76, 83^Heckscher, p. 83.^Heckscher, p. 101.^Heckscher, p. 103.^Heckscher, p. 142.^The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson by Kendrick. A. Clements^Wilson,Congressional Government(1885), pp. 186&ndash;187.^WilsonCongressional Government1885, p. 76.^Frozen Republic, 145^https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=b2A8WtVeFc4C&amp;pg=PA13&amp;dq=woodrow+wilson+welfare+state&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;ved=0CE0Q6AEwCDgKahUKEwj22NrD5dPHAhWrFNsKHbkdAwo#v=onepage&amp;q=woodrow%20wilson%20welfare%20state&amp;f=false^Wilson 3^"The Study of Administration" inPolitical Science Quarterly, June&#160;1887^Wilson, 4^Wilson 5^Wilson, 10^Wilson, 11^Wilson, 12^abHeckscher, p. 110.^Walworth v. 1^Walworth v. 1; Bragdon,Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years(1967)^abHeckscher, p. 155.^Bragdon,Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years; Walworth v. 1; Link (1947)^Heckscher, p. 156.^Heckscher, p. 174.^Cooper (2009) pp. 99&ndash;101.^abHeckscher, p. 173.^Walworth 1:109^Bragdon,Woodrow Wilson: The Academic Years, 326&ndash;327.^Heckscher, p. 183.^Heckscher, p. 176.^Cooper, John Milton.Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. p. 107^Walworth, v 1 ch 6, 7, 8^Heckscher, p. 203.^Heckscher, p. 208.^Heckscher, pp. 194, 202&ndash;203^Heckscher, p. 214.^Heckscher, p. 215.^Biography of Woodrow Wilson (PDF),New Jersey State Library.^Morris, Edmund,"The Tea Party Last Time,Op-ed,The New York Times, October&#160;31, 2010 (November&#160;1, 2010 p. A33 NY ed.). Retrieved November&#160;1, 2010.^Heckscher, p. 220.^Heckscher, pp. 216&ndash;217.^Heckscher, pp. 225&ndash;227.^Heckscher, p. 230^Heckscher, p. 231^Heckscher, pp. 231&ndash;232^Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson: The American as Southerner,"Journal of Southern History(1970) 36#1 pp. 3&ndash;17in JSTOR^Arthur S. Link, "Democratic Politics and the Presidential Campaign of 1912 in Tennessee",East Tennessee Historical Society's Publications1979 51: 114&ndash;137^Heckscher, pp. 232&ndash;233.^Heckscher, p. 234.^Heckscher, p. 238.^Heckscher, p. 245.^Heckscher, p. 247.^Heckscher, p. 246.^Heckscher, p. 249.^Heckscher, p. 250.^Arthur S. Link, "The Baltimore Convention of 1912",American Historical Review1945 50(4): 691&ndash;713in JSTOR^Cooper (2009), 163&ndash;68^Heckscher, pp. 254&ndash;255.^Heckscher, pp. 258&ndash;259.^Heckscher, p. 260.^Heckscher, pp. 256&ndash;257.^Heckscher, p. 261.^Heckscher, p. 262.^Lewis L. Gould,Four Hats in the Ring: The 1912 Election and the Birth of Modern American Politics(2008), p.&#160;??^Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 187^Heckscher, p. 265-67.^Heckscher, p. 274.^Heckscher, p. 276.^Heckscher, p. 277.^Heckscher, pp. 278&ndash;280.^Heckscher, pp. 283&ndash;284.^Rouse, Robert (March 15, 2006)."Happy Anniversary to the first scheduled presidential press conference &ndash; 93 years young!". American Chronicle.&#160;^Arthur S. Link, "Woodrow Wilson: The American as Southerner",Journal of Southern History,Vol. 36, No. 1 (1970), pp. 3&ndash;17in JSTOR^Kennedy, Ross A. (2013).A Companion to Woodrow Wilson. John Wiley &amp; Sons. pp.&#160;171&ndash;74.&#160;^Heckscher, pp. 291&ndash;292.^Link (1954) pp. 84&ndash;87^Heckscher, pp. 301&ndash;302.^abHeckscher, p. 304.^Link (1972)^Clements,Presidencych. 3^Heckscher, p. 314^Heckscher, p. 305^Heckscher, p. 306^Arthur S. Link, '"Wilson: The New Freedom(1956) pp. 177&ndash;98^Vincent W. Howard, "Woodrow Wilson, The Press, and Presidential Leadership: Another Look at the Passage of the Underwood Tariff, 1913,"CR: The Centennial Review,1980, Vol. 24 Issue 2, pp. 167&ndash;184^Heckscher, p. 316.^Heckscher, p. 317.^Link (1954) pp. 43&ndash;53^Clements,Presidency, pp. 40&ndash;44.^Keleher, Robert (March 1997)."The Importance of the Federal Reserve".Joint Economic Committee. U.S. House of Representatives.&#160;^Link,Wilson: The New Freedom(1956) pp. 199&ndash;240^Cooper, John Milton. "Woodrow Wilson: A Biography". p. 195^Heckscher, p. 321.^Heckscher, p. 322.^Ramrez, Carlos D.; Eigen-Zucchi, Christian (2001). "Understanding the Clayton Act of 1914: An Analysis of the Interest Group Hypothesis".Public Choice106(1&ndash;2): 157&ndash;181.doi:10.1023/A:1005201409149.&#160;^Heckscher, pp. 325&ndash;326.^Clements,Presidency, ch 4.^H.D. HindmanChild labor: an American history(2002)^abHeckscher, p. 326.^Heckscher, pp. 326&ndash;327.^Heckscher, p. 328.^Heckscher, pp. 329&ndash;330.^Heckscher, p. 330.^Heckscher, pp. 333&ndash;335.^Heckscher, p. 345.^Heckscher, p. 347.^Heckscher, pp. 348&ndash;350.^Heckscher, pp. 352&ndash;353.^Heckscher, pp. 350, 356.^Heckscher, p. 339.^"Primary Documents: U.S. Declaration of Neutrality, August&#160;19, 1914", accessed January&#160;7, 2002.^Heckscher, p. 340.^Clements,Presidency, ch. 7.^abHeckscher, p. 361.^Heckscher, p. 362.^Heckscher, pp. 363, 365.^Heckscher, pp. 366&ndash;369..^Heckscher, p. 378.^Heckscher, pp. 384&ndash;385^Heckscher, p. 387.^Heckscher, p. 388.^Heckscher, p. 389.^Heckscher, p. 392.^Cooper,Woodrow Wilson(2009) pp. 362&ndash;76^Heckscher, pp. 393&ndash;394.^Heckscher, pp. 396&ndash;397.^Heckscher, p. 409.^Heckscher, p. 397.^Godfrey Hodgson (2006).Woodrow Wilson's Right Hand: The Life of Colonel Edward M. House. Yale University Press. p.&#160;126.&#160;^"Woodrow Wilson: Speech of Acceptance". Presidency.ucsb.edu. September 2, 1916. RetrievedSeptember 11,2010.&#160;^Cooper, John Milton Jr.Woodrow Wilsonp 335^The American Presidency ProjectWilson quote^William M. Leary, Jr. "Woodrow Wilson, Irish Americans, and the Election of 1916",The Journal of American History,Vol. 54, No. 1. (June&#160;1967), pp. 57&ndash;72.in JSTOR^Heckscher, p. 415.^https://news.google.com/newspapers?nid=890&amp;dat=19130305&amp;id=zw9PAAAAIBAJ&amp;sjid=pkwDAAAAIBAJ&amp;pg=6689,283401&amp;hl=en^https://books.google.co.uk/books?id=Fe1AAAAAIAAJ&amp;pg=PA839&amp;lpg=PA839&amp;dq=woodrow+wilson+social+insurance&amp;source=bl&amp;ots=NrxQP-o73i&amp;sig=dbhd4BbhsHySiIBVKFz5sOgkMRc&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;ei=4nRXVcXCH8zW7AaRjIGQDg&amp;ved=0CDkQ6AEwBA#v=onepage&amp;q=woodrow%20wilson%20social%20insurance&amp;f=false^Heckscher, pp. 401&ndash;403, 430.^Heckscher, p. 427.^Heckscher, pp. 426&ndash;427.^Heckscher, pp. 428&ndash;429^Heckscher, pp. 433&ndash;435^Heckscher, pp. 436&ndash;437^For detailed coverage of the speech seeNY Times main headline, April&#160;2, 1917,President Calls for War Declaration, Stronger Navy, New Army of 500,000 Men, Full Cooperation With Germany's Foes^abCooper, John Milton,Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace, Baltimore MD: Johns Hopkins University Press,ISBN 978-0-8018-9074-1(2008), p. 190^Heckscher, p. 440^David F. Trask,The United States in the Supreme War Council: American War Aims and Inter-Allied Strategy, 1917-1918(1961).^Edward M. Coffman,The War to End All Wars(1968) ch. 3^Heckscher, pp. 460&ndash;462.^Heckscher, pp. 462&ndash;464, 476.^Heckscher, p. 474.^Heckscher, pp. 479&ndash;481.^Heckscher, p. 486.^Heckscher, p. 488.^Heckscher, p. 469.^abClements,Presidencych 8^Spencer C. Tucker (2014).World War I: The Definitive Encyclopedia and Document Collection. ABC-CLIO. p.&#160;85.&#160;^abcAvrich, Paul,Sacco and Vanzetti: The Anarchist Background, Princeton: Princeton University Press,ISBN 0-691-02604-1,ISBN 978-0-691-02604-6(1991), pp. 93&ndash;94, 124, 127, 130&ndash;133^abCooper, John Milton,Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace, Baltimore, Johns Hopkins University Press,ISBN 978-0-8018-9074-1(2008), pp. 201, 209^Records of the Committee on Public Informationfrom theNational Archives^Murray, Robert K.,Red Scare: A Study in National Hysteria, 1919&ndash;1920, Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press,ISBN 0-8166-5833-1,ISBN 978-0-8166-5833-6(1955), pp. 250&ndash;251^Leuchtenburg (1974), pp. 255&ndash;256^Leuchtenburg (1974), p. 256^Leuchtenburg (1974), pp. 256&ndash;257; U.S. Department of Justice (1918),Report on the Aircraft Inquiry, Washington D.C.; Pusey,Hughes, I, pp. 378&ndash;382^Heckscher, pp. 484&ndash;485.^Heckscher, p. 470.^Heckscher, p. 471.^Heckscher, p. 458.^Heckscher, p. 500^Heckscher, p. 536.^Heckscher, p. 538.^Heckscher, p. 539.^Heckscher, p. 541.^Heckscher, p. 544&ndash;545.^Heckscher, pp. 551&ndash;553.^Heckscher, p. 555.^Arnold M. Rice, John A. Krout,United States History From 1865, (HarperCollins, 1991), p. 180.^Naoko Shimazu (1998).Japan, Race, and Equality: The Racial Equality Proposal of 1919. NY: Routledge. pp.&#160;154ff.&#160;^President Woodrow Wilson speaking on the League of Nations to a luncheon audience in Portland OR. 66th Cong., 1st sess. Senate Documents: Addresses of President Wilson (May&ndash;November&#160;1919), vol.11, no. 120, p. 206.^John Maynard Keynes,The Economic Consequences of the Peace(London: MacMillan, 1923),available online^Heckscher, p. 589.^A. Scott Berg,Wilson(2013), pp. 619&ndash;34^Marc Trachtenberg, "Versailles after Sixty Years,"Journal of Contemporary History(1982) 17#3 pp. 487&ndash;506 esp p. 490in JSTOR^Marc Trachtenberg (2012).The Cold War and After: History, Theory, and the Logic of International Politics. Princeton University Press. p.&#160;17.&#160;^Berg,Wilson,pp. 635&ndash;43^Thomas A. Bailey,Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal(1945)^Ralph A. Stone (1970).The Irreconcilables: The Fight Against the League of Nations. Lexington: University Press of Kentucky.^Cooper,Woodrow Wilson,544, 557&ndash;560; Bailey calls Wilson's rejection, "The Supreme Infanticide,"Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal(1945) p. 271.^David M. Kennedy,Over Here: The First World War and American Society(2004) pp. 249&ndash;50^Leonard Williams Levy and Louis Fisher, eds.Encyclopedia of the American Presidency(1994) p. 494.^Walter C. Rucker; James N. Upton (2007).Encyclopedia of American Race Riots. Greenwood. p.&#160;310.&#160;^David Pietrusza,1920: The Year of Six Presidents(NY: Carroll &amp; Graf Publishers, 2007), 191&ndash;2, 198&ndash;200, 253^Robert M. Saunders (1998).In Search of Woodrow Wilson: Beliefs and Behavior. Greenwood. pp.&#160;261&ndash;2.&#160;^Paul Horgan,Great River: the Rio Grande in North American History(Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1984), 913^Clements,Presidency103&ndash;6^Brown, Isabel Zakrzewski (1999). "Culture and Customs of the Dominican Republic". Greenwood Press.&#160;^Cooper,Woodrow Wilson(2009), 381^George F. Kennan,Russia Leaves the War, p. 472,et passim. 1956, repr. 1989,ISBN 0-691-00841-8.^Robert J. Maddox,The Unknown War with Russia(San Rafael, CA: Presidio Press, 1977), 137.^Walworth (1986) 473&ndash;83, esp. p. 481; Melvin I. Urofsky,American Zionism from Herzl to the Holocaust,(1995) ch. 6; Frank W. Brecher,Reluctant Ally: United States Foreign Policy toward the Jews from Wilson to Roosevelt.(1991) ch 1&ndash;4.^Peter Balakian(2003).The Burning Tigris: The Armenian Genocide and America's Response. New York: HarperCollins.^Bailey,Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal(1945) pp. 295&ndash;96.^Hovannisian, Richard G.(1996).The Republic of Armenia, Vol. IV: Between Crescent and Sickle, Partition and Sovietization. Berkeley: University of California Press. pp.&#160;10&ndash;24.ISBN&#160;0-520-08804-2.&#160;^In 1906 Wilson first exhibited arterial hypertension, mainly untreatable at the time.Timeline for Hypertension Treatment History, accessed September&#160;14, 2009. During his presidency, he had repeated episodes of unexplained arm and hand weakness, and hisretinalarteries were said to be abnormal on fundoscopic examination.The Health &amp; Medical History of President Woodrow Wilson, accessed November&#160;9, 2009. He developed severe headaches, diplopia (double vision), and evanescent weakness of the left arm and leg. In retrospect, those problems likely represented the effects of cerebraltransient ischemic attacks. Weinstein EA,Woodrow Wilson: A Medical &amp; Psychological Biography(Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1981), pp. 260&ndash;270^Heckscher, pp. 615&ndash;622.^Grayson CT,Woodrow Wilson: An Intimate Memoir(NY: Holt, Rhinehart, &amp; Winston, 1960), pp. 96&ndash;110^Pietrusza, David (2008).1920: The Year of the Six Presidents. Basic Books. p.&#160;191.ISBN&#160;978-0-7867-1622-7.&#160;^Herbet Hoover,The Ordeal of Woodrow Wilson(Johns Hopkins University Press, 1958), pp. 271&ndash;278^Cooper,Wilsonp. 555^Birch Bayh,One Heartbeat Away: Presidential Disability(New York: BobbsMerrill, 1968).^Christine A. Lunardini and Thomas J. Knock, "Woodrow Wilson and woman suffrage: A new look,"Political Science Quarterly(1980) pp: 655-671in JSTOR.^Beth Behn, "Woodrow Wilson's conversion experience: The president and the federal woman suffrage amendment." (PhD dissertation, U. of Massachusetts-Amherst, 2012)online, quote from abstract^Foner, Eric."Expert Report Of Eric Foner".The Compelling Need for Diversity in Higher Education. University of Michigan.&#160;^Turner-Sadler, Joanne (2009).African American History: An Introduction. Peter Lang. p.&#160;100.ISBN&#160;1-4331-0743-0.President Wilson's racist policies are a matter of record.&#160;^Wolgemuth, Kathleen L. (1959). "Woodrow Wilson and Federal Segregation".The Journal of Negro History44(2): 158&ndash;173.doi:10.2307/2716036.ISSN&#160;0022-2992.JSTOR&#160;2716036.&#160;^Feagin, Joe R. (2006).Systemic Racism: A Theory of Oppression. CRC Press. p.&#160;162.ISBN&#160;0-415-95278-6.Wilson, who loved to tell racist 'darky' jokes about black Americans, placed outspoken segregationists in his cabinet and viewed racial 'segregation as a rational, scientific policy'.&#160;^Critics argue that in his book,History of the American People, Wilson depicted white European immigrants with empathy whileAfrican Americanimmigrants and their children were regarded as unsuitable for citizenship and unable to assimilate positively into American society.^abcGerstle, Gary (2008). John Milton Cooper Jr., ed.Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace. Washington D.C.: Woodrow Wilson International Center For Scholars. p.&#160;103.&#160;^Gerstle, Gary (2008). John Milton Cooper Jr., ed.Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace. Washington D.C.: Woodrow Wilson International Center For Scholars. p.&#160;104.&#160;^Gerstle, p. 104^James J. Cooke,The All-Americans at War: The 82nd Division in the Great War, 1917&ndash;1918(1999)^Mark Ellis,"'Closing Ranks' and 'Seeking Honors': W. E. B. Du Bois in World War I"Journal of American History, 1992 79(1): 96&ndash;124.JSTOR&#160;2078469^Arthur Link,Wilson:The Road to the White House(Princeton University Press, 1947) 502^Wilson, Woodrow (1918) [1901],A History of the American PeopleIX, New York: Harper and Brothers, p.&#160;59, retrievedJuly 6,2010&#160;^John Milton Cooper (2011).Woodrow Wilson: A Biography. pp.&#160;272&ndash;73.&#160;^"Wilson - A Portrait | African Americans".&#160;^Arthur Walworth, "Considerations on Woodrow Wilson and Edward M. House",Presidential Studies Quarterly1994 24(1): 79&ndash;86.ISSN&#160;0360-4918^ab"CR.NPS.gov". CR.NPS.gov. RetrievedNovember 10,2011.&#160;^David Henry Burton.Theodore Roosevelt, American Politician, p. 146. Fairleigh Dickinson University Press, 1997,ISBN 0-8386-3727-2^"NPS.gov". NPS.gov. November 10, 1923. RetrievedNovember 10,2011.&#160;^"Woodrowwilsonhouse.org". Woodrowwilsonhouse.org. RetrievedNovember 10,2011.&#160;^John Whitcomb, Claire Whitcomb.Real Life at the White House, p. 262. Routledge, 2002,ISBN 0-415-93951-8^See"Woodrow Wilson House", National Park Service Website, accessed January&#160;12, 2009^Wills of the U.S. Presidents, edited by Herbert R Collins and David B Weaver (New York: Communication Channels Inc., 1976) 176&ndash;177,ISBN 0-916164-01-2.^Woodrow Wilson Library^The Newark Star Ledger.&#160;CS1 maint: Untitled periodical (link)^Bruce Garver, "Czech Cubism and Fin-De-Sicle Prague."Austrian History Yearbook19.01 (1983): 91-104.^Peter Bugge, "The Making of a Slovak City: The Czechoslovak Renaming of Pressburg/Pozsony/Pre&scaron;porok, 1918&ndash;19."Austrian History Yearbook35 (2004): 205-227.^Seehttp://www.woodrowwilsonhouse.org/websiteBibliographyBiographicalBerg, A. Scott.Wilson(2013), full-scale scholarly biographyBlum, John.Woodrow Wilson and the Politics of Morality(1956); short scholarly biographyBrands, H. W.Woodrow Wilson 1913&ndash;1921(2003); short scholarly biographyCooper, John Milton.Woodrow Wilson: A Biography(2009), full-scale scholarly biographyHeckscher, August (1991).Woodrow Wilson. Easton Press.&#160;Levin, Phyllis&#160;Lee (2001).Edith and Woodrow: The Wilson White House. Scribner.ISBN&#160;0-7432-1158-8.&#160;Link, Arthur S. "Woodrow Wilson" in Henry F. Graff ed.,The Presidents: A Reference History(2002) pp.&#160;365&ndash;388; short scholarly biographyLink, Arthur Stanley.Wilson: The Road to the White House(1947), first volume of standard biography (to 1917);Wilson: The New Freedom(1956);Wilson: The Struggle for Neutrality: 1914&ndash;1915(1960);Wilson: Confusions and Crises: 1915&ndash;1916(1964);Wilson: Campaigns for Progressivism and Peace: 1916&ndash;1917(1965), the last volume of standard scholarly biographyMaynard, W. Barksdale.Woodrow Wilson: Princeton to the Presidency(2008)Miller, Kristie.Ellen and Edith: Woodrow Wilson's First Ladies(University Press of Kansas, 2010)Post, Jerrold M. "Woodrow Wilson Re-Examined: The Mind-Body Controversy Redux and Other Disputations,"Political Psychology(1983) 4#2 pp.&#160;289&ndash;306in JSTOR, on Wilson's self-defeating behaviorWalworth, Arthur (1958).Woodrow Wilson, Volume I. Longmans, Green.&#160;; full scale scholarly biographyScholarly topical studiesAmbrosius, Lloyd E., "Woodrow Wilson and George W. Bush: Historical Comparisons of Ends and Means in Their Foreign Policies",Diplomatic History, 30 (June&#160;2006), 509&ndash;43.Bailey; Thomas A.Wilson and the Peacemakers: Combining Woodrow Wilson and the Lost Peace and Woodrow Wilson and the Great Betrayal(1947); detailed coverage of 1919Clements, Kendrick, A.Woodrow Wilson: World Statesman(1999)Clements, Kendrick A.The Presidency of Woodrow Wilson(1992), a standard scholarly surveyClements, Kendrick A. "Woodrow Wilson and World War I",Presidential Studies Quarterly34:1 (2004). pp.&#160;62+Cooper, John Milton, ed.Reconsidering Woodrow Wilson: Progressivism, Internationalism, War, and Peace(Johns Hopkins University Press, 2008)Cooper, John Milton. "Making A Case for Wilson," inReconsidering Woodrow Wilson(2008) ch 1Davis, Donald E. and Eugene P. Trani.The First Cold War: The Legacy of Woodrow Wilson in U.S.-Soviet Relations] (2002)onlineGreene, Theodore P., ed.Wilson at Versailles(1957) essays by scholars and primary sourcesHofstadter, Richard. "Woodrow Wilson: The Conservative as Liberal" inThe American Political Tradition(1948), ch. 10.Janis, Mark Weston. "How Wilsonian Was Woodrow Wilson?,"Dartmouth Law Journal(2007) 5:1 pp.&#160;1&ndash;15onlineKazianis, Harry. "Woodrow Wilson: Civil War, Morality and Foreign Policy",E-International Relations(2011),E-ir.infoKennedy, Ross A., ed.A Companion to Woodrow Wilson(2013), historiographical essays by scholarsKnock, Thomas J.To End All Wars: Woodrow Wilson and the Quest for a New World Order(1995)Levin, Jr., N. Gordon.Woodrow Wilson and World Politics: America's Response to War and Revolution(1968)Link, Arthur Stanley.Woodrow Wilson and the Progressive Era, 1910&ndash;1917(1972) standard political history of the eraLink, Arthur S.;Wilson the Diplomatist: A Look at His Major Foreign Policies(1957)Link, Arthur S.;Woodrow Wilson and a Revolutionary World, 1913&ndash;1921(1982)Livermore, Seward W.Woodrow Wilson and the War Congress, 1916&ndash;1918(1966)Malin, James C.The United States after the World War(1930) onlineSaunders, Robert M.In Search of Woodrow Wilson: Beliefs and Behavior(1998)Trani, Eugene P. "Woodrow Wilson and the Decision to Intervene in Russia: A Reconsideration".Journal of Modern History(1976). 48:440&ndash;61.in JSTORTucker, Robert W.Woodrow Wilson and the Great War: Reconsidering America's Neutrality, 1914&ndash;1917(2007)Vought, Hans. "Woodrow Wilson, Ethnicity, and the Myth of American Unity".InMyth America: A Historical Anthology, Volume II. 1997. Gerster, Patrick, and Cords, Nicholas. (editors.) Brandywine Press, St. James, NY.ISBN 1-881-089-97-5Walworth, Arthur;Wilson and His Peacemakers: American Diplomacy at the Paris Peace Conference, 1919(1986)Yellin, Eric S.Racism in the Nation's Service: Government Workers and the Color Line in Woodrow Wilson's America(2013)Princeton University (1956). "Woodrow Wilson &ndash; Catalogue of an Exhibition in the Princeton University Library February&#160;18 through April&#160;15, 1956 Commemorating the Centennial of His Birth"XVII(3, Spring issue). The Princeton University Library Chronicle.&#160;Primary sourcesAugust Heckscher, ed.,The Politics of Woodrow Wilson: Selections from his Speeches and Writings(1956)Link, Arthur S. (editor).The Papers of Woodrow Wilson.&#160;69 volumes. Annotated edition of all of Wilson's correspondence, speeches and writings.Tumulty, Joseph P.(1921).Woodrow Wilson as I Know Him.&#160;. Memoir by Wilson's chief of staff.Wilson, Edith Bolling (1939).My memoir. Bobbs-Merrill.ASIN&#160;B0008BKX5I.&#160;Arno Press reprint: 1981.Wilson, Woodrow."Congressional government: a study in American politics (1885)"The New Freedom by Woodrow WilsonatProject Gutenberg1912 campaign speechesWilson, Woodrow (1917).Why We Are at War.&#160;Wilson, Woodrow.Selected Literary &amp; Political Papers &amp; Addresses of Woodrow Wilson.&#160;3 volumes, 1918 and later editions.Woodrow Wilson, compiled with his approval by Hamilton Foley;Woodrow Wilson's Case for the League of Nations, Princeton University Press, Princeton 1923;contemporary book reviewWilson, Woodrow.Messages &amp; Papers of Woodrow Wilson2 vol (ISBN 1-135-19812-8)Wilson, Woodrow.The New Democracy. Presidential Messages, Addresses, and Other Papers (1913&ndash;1917)2 vol 1926,ISBN 0-89875-775-4Wilson, Woodrow.President Woodrow Wilson's Fourteen Points (1918)Wilson, Woodrow. Presidential papers and personal library,Woodrow Wilson Libraryof the Library of Congress.External linksFind more aboutWoodrow Wilsonat Wikipedia'ssister projectsDefinitionsfrom WiktionaryMediafrom CommonsQuotationsfrom WikiquoteSource textsfrom WikisourceWoodrow Wilson Presidential Library &amp; MuseumSpeeches and other worksFull text of a number of Wilson's speeches,Miller Center of Public AffairsWorks by Woodrow WilsonatProject GutenbergWorks by or about Woodrow WilsonatInternet ArchiveWorks by Woodrow WilsonatLibriVox(public domain audiobooks)Media coverageWoodrow Wilsoncollected news and commentary atThe New York TimesStudy sitesWoodrow Wilson: A Resource Guidefrom the Library of CongressExtensive essays on Woodrow Wilsonand shorter essays on each member of his cabinet and First Lady from the Miller Center of Public AffairsWoodrow Wilson LinksWoodrow Wilson: Prophet of Peace, aNational Park ServiceTeaching with Historic Places lesson planvteWoodrow Wilson28thPresident of the United States(1913&ndash;1921)34thGovernor of New Jersey(1911&ndash;1913)13thPresident of Princeton University(1902&ndash;1910)Presidency1913 inaugurationSuffrage Parade1917 inaugurationThe New FreedomClayton Antitrust ActFarm Loan ActFederal Employees' Compensation ActFederal Reserve SystemFederal Reserve ActFederal Income Tax amendmentFederal Trade Commission ActFederal Trade CommissionRevenue Act of 1913Flag DayNational Advisory Committee for AeronauticsOccupation of HaitiBryan&ndash;Chamorro TreatyPhilippine Autonomy ActWorld War Ientrycampaignshome frontCommittee on Public InformationEspionage Act of 1917Selective Service Act of 1917National War Labor BoardThe InquiryAmerican Commission to Negotiate PeaceParis Peace Conference, 1919Treaty of VersaillesThe Big FourFourteen PointsLeague of Nations1919 Nobel Peace PrizeSilent SentinelsWomen's Suffrage amendmentRoosevelt deskJudicial appointmentsSupreme CourtCabinetState of the Union Address 1913191419151916191719181920LifeBirthplace and Presidential Librarypapers and manuscriptsBoyhood home in GeorgiaBoyhood home in South CarolinaPrinceton University presidentSummer White House (HarlakendenShadow Lawn)Woodrow Wilson HouseGravesiteBooksCongressional GovernmentWhen a Man Comes to HimselfThe New Freedom(1913)Elections1912 Democratic National Convention1912 U.S. presidential election1916 Democratic National Convention1916 U.S. presidential electionLegacyWilsonianismWoodrow Wilson FoundationWoodrow Wilson International Center for ScholarsWoodrow Wilson School of Public and International AffairsWoodrow Wilson BridgeWoodrow Wilson National Fellowship FoundationPostage stampsCurrencyPopularcultureWilson(1944 film)Profiles in Courage(1965 series)Wilson(2013 book)Woodrow Wilson and the Birth of the American Century(2002 documentary)FamilyJoseph Ruggles Wilson(father)Jessie Janet Woodrow(mother)Ellen Axson Wilson(wife, 1885&ndash;1914; death)Edith Bolling Wilson(wife, 1915&ndash;1924)Margaret Wilson(daughter)Jessie Wilson Sayre(daughter)Eleanor Wilson McAdoo(daughter)William McAdoo(son-in-law)Francis Sayre, Jr.(grandson)James Woodrow(uncle)RelatedProgressive EraJefferson Literary and Debating Society? William Howard TaftWarren G. Harding ?CommonsWikibooksWikiquoteWikisource texts&#160;Offices and distinctionsAcademic officesPreceded&#160;byFrancis Landey PattonPresident of Princeton University1902&ndash;1910Succeeded&#160;byJohn Aikman StewartActingParty political officesPreceded&#160;byFrank S. KatzenbachNew JerseyDemocraticgubernatorial nominee1910Succeeded&#160;byJames Fairman FielderPreceded&#160;byWilliam Jennings BryanDemocraticpresidential nominee1912,1916Succeeded&#160;byJames M. CoxPolitical officesPreceded&#160;byJohn Franklin FortGovernor of New Jersey1911&ndash;1913Succeeded&#160;byJames Fairman FielderActing GovernorPreceded&#160;byWilliam Howard TaftPresident of the United States1913&ndash;1921Succeeded&#160;byWarren G. HardingAwards and achievementsPreceded&#160;byInternational Committeeof the Red CrossNobel Peace Prize Laureate1919Succeeded&#160;byLon BourgeoisPreceded&#160;byGiulio Gatti-CasazzaCover of Time MagazineNovember 12, 1923Succeeded&#160;byErich LudendorffvteHall of Fame for Great AmericansJohn AdamsJohn Quincy AdamsJane AddamsLouis AgassizSusan B. AnthonyJohn James AudubonGeorge BancroftClara BartonHenry Ward BeecherAlexander Graham BellDaniel BooneEdwin BoothLouis BrandeisPhillips BrooksWilliam Cullen BryantLuther BurbankAndrew CarnegieGeorge Washington CarverWilliam Ellery ChanningRufus ChoateHenry ClayGrover ClevelandJames Fenimore CooperPeter CooperCharlotte CushmanJames Buchanan EadsThomas Alva EdisonJonathan EdwardsRalph Waldo EmersonDavid FarragutStephen FosterBenjamin FranklinRobert FultonJosiah W. GibbsWilliam C. GorgasUlysses S. GrantAsa GrayAlexander HamiltonNathaniel HawthorneJoseph HenryPatrick HenryOliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.Mark HopkinsElias HoweWashington IrvingAndrew JacksonThomas J. JacksonThomas JeffersonJohn Paul JonesJames KentSidney LanierRobert E. LeeAbraham LincolnHenry Wadsworth LongfellowJames Russell LowellMary LyonEdward MacDowellJames MadisonHorace MannJohn MarshallMatthew Fontaine MauryAlbert A. MichelsonMaria MitchellJames MonroeSamuel F. B. MorseWilliam T. G. MortonJohn Lothrop MotleySimon NewcombThomas PaineAlice Freeman PalmerFrancis ParkmanGeorge PeabodyWilliam PennEdgar Allan PoeWalter ReedFranklin D. RooseveltTheodore RooseveltAugustus Saint-GaudensWilliam Tecumseh ShermanJohn Philip SousaJoseph StoryHarriet Beecher StoweGilbert StuartSylvanus ThayerHenry David ThoreauMark TwainLillian WaldBooker T. WashingtonGeorge WashingtonDaniel WebsterGeorge WestinghouseJames McNeill WhistlerWalt WhitmanEli WhitneyJohn Greenleaf WhittierEmma WillardFrances E. WillardRoger WilliamsWoodrow WilsonOrville WrightWilbur Wright&#160;Articles related to Woodrow WilsonvtePresidents of the United States18th centuryGeorge WashingtonJohn Adams19th centuryThomas JeffersonJames MadisonJames MonroeJohn Quincy AdamsAndrew JacksonMartin Van BurenWilliam Henry HarrisonJohn TylerJames K. PolkZachary TaylorMillard FillmoreFranklin PierceJames BuchananAbraham LincolnAndrew JohnsonUlysses S. GrantRutherford B. HayesJames A. GarfieldChester A. ArthurGrover ClevelandBenjamin HarrisonGrover ClevelandWilliam McKinley20th centuryTheodore RooseveltWilliam Howard TaftWoodrow WilsonWarren G. HardingCalvin CoolidgeHerbert HooverFranklin D. RooseveltHarry S. TrumanDwight D. EisenhowerJohn F. KennedyLyndon B. JohnsonRichard NixonGerald FordJimmy CarterRonald ReaganGeorge H. W. BushBill Clinton21st centuryGeorge W. BushBarack ObamavteCabinetofPresidentWoodrow Wilson(1913&ndash;21)Vice PresidentThomas R. Marshall(1913&ndash;21)Secretary of StateWilliam Jennings Bryan(1913&ndash;15)Robert Lansing(1915&ndash;20)Bainbridge Colby(1920&ndash;21)Secretary of the TreasuryWilliam G. McAdoo(1913&ndash;18)Carter Glass(1918&ndash;20)David F. Houston(1920&ndash;21)Secretary of WarLindley M. Garrison(1913&ndash;16)Newton D. Baker(1916&ndash;21)Attorney GeneralJames C. McReynolds(1913&ndash;14)Thomas W. Gregory(1914&ndash;19)A. Mitchell Palmer(1919&ndash;21)Postmaster GeneralAlbert S. Burleson(1913&ndash;21)Secretary of the NavyJosephus Daniels(1913&ndash;21)Secretary of the InteriorFranklin K. Lane(1913&ndash;20)John B. Payne(1920&ndash;21)Secretary of AgricultureDavid F. Houston(1913&ndash;20)Edwin T. Meredith(1920&ndash;21)Secretary of CommerceWilliam C. Redfield(1913&ndash;19)Joshua W. Alexander(1919&ndash;21)Secretary of LaborWilliam B. Wilson(1913&ndash;21)vteUnited States Democratic PartyChairpersonsof theDNCHallettMcLaneSmalleyBelmontSchellHewittBarnumBriceHarrityJonesTaggartMackMcCombsMcCormickCummingsWhiteHullShaverRaskobFarleyFlynnWalkerHanneganMcGrathBoyleMcKinneyMitchellButlerJacksonBaileyO'BrienHarrisO'BrienWestwoodStraussCurtisWhiteManattKirkBrownWilhelmDeLeeDodd/FowlerRomer/GrossmanRendell/AndrewMcAuliffeDeanKaineWasserman SchultzPresidentialticketsJackson/CalhounJackson/Van BurenVan Buren/R. JohnsonVan BurenPolk/DallasCass/ButlerPierce/KingBuchanan/BreckinridgeDouglas/H. Johnson(Breckinridge/Lane,SD)McClellan/PendletonSeymour/BlairGreeley/BrownTilden/HendricksHancock/EnglishCleveland/HendricksCleveland/ThurmanCleveland/Stevenson IW. Bryan/SewallW. Bryan/Stevenson IParker/H. DavisW. Bryan/KernWilson/Marshall(twice)Cox/RooseveltJ. Davis/C. BryanSmith/RobinsonRoosevelt/Garner(twice)Roosevelt/WallaceRoosevelt/TrumanTruman/BarkleyStevenson II/SparkmanStevenson II/KefauverKennedy/L. JohnsonL. Johnson/HumphreyHumphrey/MuskieMcGovern/(Eagleton,Shriver)Carter/Mondale(twice)Mondale/FerraroDukakis/BentsenClinton/Gore(twice)Gore/LiebermanKerry/EdwardsObama/Biden(twice)State/TerritorialPartiesAlabamaAlaskaArizonaArkansasCaliforniaColoradoConnecticutDelawareFloridaGeorgiaHawaiiIdahoIllinoisIndianaIowaKansasKentuckyLouisianaMaineMarylandMassachusettsMichiganMinnesotaMississippiMissouriMontanaNebraskaNevadaNew HampshireNew JerseyNew MexicoNew YorkNorth CarolinaNorth DakotaOhioOklahomaOregonPennsylvaniaRhode IslandSouth CarolinaSouth DakotaTennesseeTexasUtahVermontVirginiaWashingtonWest VirginiaWisconsinWyomingDistrict of ColumbiaDemocratic Party of GuamPuerto RicoConventions(List)1832 (Baltimore)1835 (Baltimore)1840 (Baltimore)1844 (Baltimore)1848 (Baltimore)1852 (Baltimore)1856 (Cincinnati)1860 (Baltimore)1864 (Chicago)1868 (New York)1872 (Baltimore)1876 (Saint Louis)1880 (Cincinnati)1884 (Chicago)1888 (Saint Louis)1892 (Chicago)1896 (Chicago)1900 (Kansas City)1904 (Saint Louis)1908 (Denver)1912 (Baltimore)1916 (Saint Louis)1920 (San Francisco)1924 (New York)1928 (Houston)1932 (Chicago)1936 (Philadelphia)1940 (Chicago)1944 (Chicago)1948 (Philadelphia)1952 (Chicago)1956 (Chicago)1960 (Los Angeles)1964 (Atlantic City)1968 (Chicago)1972 (Miami Beach)1976 (New York)1980 (New York)1984 (San Francisco)1988 (Atlanta)1992 (New York)1996 (Chicago)2000 (Los Angeles)2004 (Boston)2008 (Denver)2012 (Charlotte)2016 (Philadelphia)AffiliatedgroupsFundraisingDemocratic Congressional Campaign CommitteeDemocratic Governors AssociationDemocratic Legislative Campaign CommitteeDemocratic Senatorial Campaign CommitteeNational Conference of Democratic MayorsSectionalCollege Democrats of AmericaDemocrats AbroadNational Federation of Democratic WomenNational Stonewall DemocratsYoung Democrats of AmericaHigh School Democrats of AmericaFactional21st Century DemocratsBlue Dog CoalitionCongressional Progressive CaucusDemocracy for AmericaDemocratic Leadership CouncilNew Democrat CoalitionProgressive Democrats of AmericaRelated articlesHistoryParty factionsSuperdelegateLiberalism portalvteGovernors of New JerseyProprietary ProvinceCarteretEast New JerseyCarteretBarclayHamiltonBasseHamiltonWest New JerseyByllyngeCoxeHamiltonBasseHamiltonDominion of New England(1688&ndash;89)AndrosRoyal GovernorsViscount CornburyBaron LovelaceIngoldesby(Lt. Gov.)HunterBurnetMontgomerieMorris(acting)CosbyAnderson(acting)Hamilton(acting)Lord De La WarrMorrisHamilton(acting)Reading(acting)BelcherReading(acting)Pownall(Lt. Gov.)Reading(acting)BernardBooneHardyFranklinPost-ColonialLivingstonPatersonHowellBloomfieldOgdenW.S. PenningtonM. DickersonWilliamsonVroomSouthardSeeleyVroomP. DickersonW. PenningtonHainesStrattonHainesG. FortPriceNewellOldenParkerWardRandolphParkerBedleMcClellanLudlowAbbettGreenAbbettWertsGriggsVoorheesMurphyStokesJ. FortWilsonFielderEdgeEdwardsSilzerMooreLarsonMooreHoffmanMooreEdisonEdgeDriscollMeynerHughesCahillByrneKeanFlorioWhitmanDiFrancescoMcGreeveyCodeyCorzineChristieBook:Governors of New JerseyvtePresidents of Princeton UniversityDickinsonBurrEdwardsDaviesFinleyWitherspoonSmithGreenCarnahanMacleanMcCoshPattonWilsonHibbenDoddsGoheenBowenShapiroTilghmanEisgruberOfficial residencesMaclean House(1756-1878)Prospect House(1878-1968)Walter Lowrie House(1968-present)vteLaureatesof theNobel Peace Prize1901&ndash;19251901Henry Dunant&#160;/Frdric Passy1902lie Ducommun&#160;/Charles Gobat1903Randal Cremer1904Institut de Droit International1905Bertha von Suttner1906Theodore Roosevelt1907Ernesto Moneta&#160;/Louis Renault1908Klas Arnoldson&#160;/Fredrik Bajer1909A. M. F. Beernaert&#160;/Paul Estournelles de Constant1910International Peace Bureau1911Tobias Asser&#160;/Alfred Fried1912Elihu Root1913Henri La Fontaine1914191519161917International Committee of the Red Cross19181919Woodrow Wilson1920Lon Bourgeois1921Hjalmar Branting&#160;/Christian Lange1922Fridtjof Nansen192319241925Austen Chamberlain&#160;/Charles Dawes1926&ndash;19501926Aristide Briand&#160;/Gustav Stresemann1927Ferdinand Buisson&#160;/Ludwig Quidde19281929Frank B. Kellogg1930Nathan Sderblom1931Jane Addams&#160;/Nicholas Butler19321933Norman Angell1934Arthur Henderson1935Carl von Ossietzky1936Carlos Saavedra Lamas1937Robert Cecil1938Nansen International Office for Refugees193919401941194219431944International Committee of the Red Cross1945Cordell Hull1946Emily Balch&#160;/John Mott1947Friends Service Council&#160;/American Friends Service Committee19481949John Boyd Orr1950Ralph Bunche1951&ndash;19751951Lon Jouhaux1952Albert Schweitzer1953George Marshall1954United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees195519561957Lester B. Pearson1958Georges Pire1959Philip Noel-Baker1960Albert Lutuli1961Dag Hammarskjld1962Linus Pauling1963International Committee of the Red Cross&#160;/League of Red Cross Societies1964Martin Luther King, Jr.1965UNICEF196619671968Ren Cassin1969International Labour Organization1970Norman Borlaug1971Willy Brandt19721973L ??c Th?&#160;(declined award)&#160;/Henry Kissinger1974Sen MacBride&#160;/Eisaku Sat?1975Andrei Sakharov1976&ndash;20001976Betty Williams&#160;/Mairead Corrigan1977Amnesty International1978Anwar Sadat&#160;/Menachem Begin1979Mother Teresa1980Adolfo Prez Esquivel1981United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees1982Alva Myrdal&#160;/Alfonso Garca Robles1983Lech Wa??sa1984Desmond Tutu1985International Physicians for the Prevention of Nuclear War1986Elie Wiesel1987scar Arias1988UN Peacekeeping Forces1989Tenzin Gyatso(14th Dalai Lama)1990Mikhail Gorbachev1991Aung San Suu Kyi1992Rigoberta Mench1993Nelson Mandela&#160;/F. W. de Klerk1994Shimon Peres&#160;/Yitzhak Rabin&#160;/Yasser Arafat1995Pugwash Conferences&#160;/Joseph Rotblat1996Carlos Belo&#160;/Jos Ramos-Horta1997International Campaign to Ban Landmines&#160;/Jody Williams1998John Hume&#160;/David Trimble1999Mdecins Sans Frontires2000Kim Dae-jung2001&ndash;present2001Kofi Annan&#160;/United Nations2002Jimmy Carter2003Shirin Ebadi2004Wangari Maathai2005International Atomic Energy Agency&#160;/Mohamed ElBaradei2006Grameen Bank&#160;/Muhammad Yunus2007Al Gore&#160;/Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change2008Martti Ahtisaari2009Barack Obama2010Liu Xiaobo2011Ellen Johnson Sirleaf&#160;/Leymah Gbowee&#160;/Tawakkol Karman2012European Union2013Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons2014Kailash Satyarthi&#160;/Malala Yousafzai2015Tunisian National Dialogue QuartetvteHall of Fame for Great AmericansJohn AdamsJohn Quincy AdamsJane AddamsLouis AgassizSusan B. AnthonyJohn James AudubonGeorge BancroftClara BartonHenry Ward BeecherAlexander Graham BellDaniel BooneEdwin BoothLouis BrandeisPhillips BrooksWilliam Cullen BryantLuther BurbankAndrew CarnegieGeorge Washington CarverWilliam Ellery ChanningRufus ChoateHenry ClayGrover ClevelandJames Fenimore CooperPeter CooperCharlotte CushmanJames Buchanan EadsThomas Alva EdisonJonathan EdwardsRalph Waldo EmersonDavid FarragutStephen FosterBenjamin FranklinRobert FultonJosiah W. GibbsWilliam C. GorgasUlysses S. GrantAsa GrayAlexander HamiltonNathaniel HawthorneJoseph HenryPatrick HenryOliver Wendell Holmes, Sr.Oliver Wendell Holmes, Jr.Mark HopkinsElias HoweWashington IrvingAndrew JacksonThomas J. JacksonThomas JeffersonJohn Paul JonesJames KentSidney LanierRobert E. LeeAbraham LincolnHenry Wadsworth LongfellowJames Russell LowellMary LyonEdward MacDowellJames MadisonHorace MannJohn MarshallMatthew Fontaine MauryAlbert A. MichelsonMaria MitchellJames MonroeSamuel F. B. MorseWilliam T. G. MortonJohn Lothrop MotleySimon NewcombThomas PaineAlice Freeman PalmerFrancis ParkmanGeorge PeabodyWilliam PennEdgar Allan PoeWalter ReedFranklin D. RooseveltTheodore RooseveltAugustus Saint-GaudensWilliam Tecumseh ShermanJohn Philip SousaJoseph StoryHarriet Beecher StoweGilbert StuartSylvanus ThayerHenry David ThoreauMark TwainLillian WaldBooker T. WashingtonGeorge WashingtonDaniel WebsterGeorge WestinghouseJames McNeill WhistlerWalt WhitmanEli WhitneyJohn Greenleaf WhittierEmma WillardFrances E. WillardRoger WilliamsWoodrow WilsonOrville WrightWilbur WrightvtePresidents of theAmerican Historical AssociationA. WhiteBancroftWinsorPooleC. K. AdamsJayHenryAngellH AdamsHoarStorrsSchoulerFisherRhodesEgglestonC. F. AdamsMahanLeaSmithMcMasterBaldwinJamesonG. AdamsHartTurnerSloaneRooseveltDunningMcLaughlinStephensBurrFordThayerChanningJusserandHaskinsCheyneyWilsonAndrewsMunroTaylorBreastedRobinsonGreeneBeckerBoltonBeardDoddRostovtzeffMcIlwainFordLarsonFergusonFarrandThompsonSchlesingerNeilsonWestermannHayesFayWertenbakerLatouretteReadMorisonSchuylerRandallGottschalkCurtiThorndikePerkinsLangerWebbNevinsBemisBridenbaughBrintonBoydLaneNicholsHolbornFairbankWoodwardPalmerPotterCochranL. WhiteHankeWrightMorrisGibsonBouwsmaFranklinPinkneyBailynCraigCurtinLinkMcNeillDeglerDavisIriyeHarlanHerlihyLeuchtenburgWakemanTillyHoltCoatsworthBynumApplebyMillerDarntonFonerLouisHuntMcPhersonSpenceSheehanKerberWeinsteinSpiegelUlrichMetcalfGraftonCrononPomeranzGoldsteinAuthority controlWorldCatVIAF:89457467LCCN:n79046299ISNI:0000 0001 2143 0139GND:118643401SUDOC:027198111BNF:cb119292736(data)MusicBrainz:eeae0d6d-7f70-4cf8-a001-95ca2d4d3fd2NDL:00461151NewPP limit report
Parsed by mw1105
Cached time: 20151020122249
Cache expiry: 86400
Dynamic content: true
CPU time usage: 2.536 seconds
Real time usage: 2.959 seconds
Preprocessor visited node count: 23081/1000000
Preprocessor generated node count: 0/1500000
Post?expand include size: 485413/2097152 bytes
Template argument size: 144398/2097152 bytes
Highest expansion depth: 20/40
Expensive parser function count: 5/500
Lua time usage: 0.608/10.000 seconds
Lua memory usage: 6.02 MB/50 MB
Number of Wikibase entities loaded: 1Transclusion expansion time report (%,ms,calls,template)
100.00% 2085.037      1 - -total
 21.89%  456.507      1 - Template:Reflist
 21.51%  448.574      7 - Template:Infobox
 21.48%  447.794      1 - Template:Infobox_Officeholder
 13.26%  276.552      2 - Template:Navboxes
  9.91%  206.725     10 - Template:Navbox
  9.50%  198.104     17 - Template:Infobox_officeholder/office
  9.02%  188.098      1 - Template:Infobox_U.S._Cabinet
  8.24%  171.807      1 - Template:Infobox_cabinet_members
  6.32%  131.712     29 - Template:Cite_bookSaved in parser cache with key enwiki:pcache:idhash:33523-0!*!0!!en!4!* and timestamp 20151020122246 and revision id 686237350Retrieved from "https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Woodrow_Wilson&amp;oldid=686237350"Categories:Woodrow Wilson1856 births1924 deathsAmerican Nobel laureatesAmerican people of Scotch-Irish descentAmerican people of Scottish descentAmerican people of World War IAmerican PresbyteriansAmerican progressivesBryn Mawr College facultyBurials at Washington National CathedralDemocratic Party Presidents of the United StatesDemocratic Party state governors of the United StatesDemocratic Party (United States) presidential nomineesFellows of the American Academy of Arts and SciencesGovernors of New JerseyHistory of racial segregation in the United StatesJohns Hopkins University alumniLeague of Nations peopleNew Jersey DemocratsNobel Peace Prize laureatesPeople from Augusta, GeorgiaPeople from Staunton, VirginiaPeople of the Russian Civil WarPresidency of Woodrow WilsonPresidents of Princeton UniversityPresidents of the American Historical AssociationPresidents of the United StatesPrinceton University alumniPrinceton University facultyProgressive Era in the United StatesUnited States presidential candidates, 1912United States presidential candidates, 1916University of Virginia facultyWesleyan Cardinals football coachesWesleyan University facultyAmerican politicians with physical disabilitiesMembers of the American Philosophical SocietyHall of Fame for Great Americans inductees19th-century American people20th-century American politicians19th-century Presbyterians20th-century PresbyteriansAmerican portraits on banknotesHidden categories:CS1 maint: Untitled periodicalWikipedia pages semi-protected against vandalismWikipedia protected pages without expiryUse mdy dates from February 2012Interlanguage link template link numberWikipedia articles with VIAF identifiersWikipedia articles with LCCN identifiersWikipedia articles with ISNI identifiersWikipedia articles with GND identifiersWikipedia articles with BNF identifiersWikipedia articles with MusicBrainz identifiersArticles containing video clipsNavigation menuPersonal toolsCreate accountLog inNamespacesArticleTalkVariantsViewsReadView sourceView historyMoreSearchNavigationMain pageContentsFeatured contentCurrent eventsRandom articleDonate to WikipediaWikipedia storeInteractionHelpAbout WikipediaCommunity portalRecent changesContact pageToolsWhat links hereRelated changesUpload fileSpecial pagesPermanent linkPage informationWikidata itemCite this pagePrint/exportCreate a bookDownload as PDFPrintable versionLanguagesAfrikaans???????????AragonsAz?rbaycanca?????Bn-lm-g???????????????????? (???????????)?Bikol Central?????????BosanskiBrezhonegCatalCebuano?e&scaron;tinaCorsuCymraegDanskDeutschEesti????????EspaolEsperantoEuskara?????FroysktFranaisFryskGaeilgeGaelgGidhligGalego???/Hak-k-ng????????????????HrvatskiIdoIlokanoBahasa IndonesiaslenskaItaliano?????Basa Jawa?????Kapampangan??????????????KernowekKinyarwandaKiswahiliKurd????????LatinaLatvie&scaron;uLtzebuergeschLietuvi?Magyar??????????Malagasy?????????????????Bahasa MelayuNederlands???Norsk bokmlNorsk nynorskOccitanO?zbekcha/???????????????????PiemontisPolskiPortugusRomn?RumantschRuna Simi???????ScotsShqipSicilianuSimple EnglishSloven?inaSloven&scaron;?ina?????? / srpskiSrpskohrvatski / ??????????????SuomiSvenskaTagalog???????/tatara???Trke?????????????????????? / UyghurcheTi?ng Vi?tWinaray??????Yorb??Edit linksThis page was last modified on 17 October 2015, at 22:33.Text is available under theCreative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License;
additional terms may apply.  By using this site, you agree to theTerms of UseandPrivacy Policy. Wikipedia is a registered trademark of theWikimedia Foundation, Inc., a non-profit organization.Privacy policyAbout WikipediaDisclaimersContact WikipediaDevelopersMobile viewwindow.RLQ = window.RLQ || []; window.RLQ.push( function () {
mw.loader.state({"ext.globalCssJs.site":"ready","ext.globalCssJs.user":"ready","mw.PopUpMediaTransform":"loading","user":"ready","user.groups":"ready"});mw.loader.load("/w/load.php?debug=false\u0026lang=en\u0026modules=mw.PopUpMediaTransform\u0026only=scripts\u0026skin=vector");
} );window.RLQ = window.RLQ || []; window.RLQ.push( function () {
mw.loader.load(["ext.cite.a11y","mediawiki.toc","mediawiki.action.view.postEdit","site","mediawiki.user","mediawiki.hidpi","mediawiki.page.ready","mediawiki.searchSuggest","mmv.bootstrap.autostart","ext.eventLogging.subscriber","ext.wikimediaEvents","ext.wikimediaEvents.geoFeatures","ext.navigationTiming","ext.gadget.teahouse","ext.gadget.ReferenceTooltips","ext.gadget.DRN-wizard","ext.gadget.charinsert","ext.gadget.refToolbar","ext.gadget.switcher","ext.gadget.featured-articles-links","ext.visualEditor.targetLoader","schema.UniversalLanguageSelector","ext.uls.eventlogger","ext.uls.interlanguage"]);
} );window.RLQ = window.RLQ || []; window.RLQ.push( function () {
mw.config.set({"wgBackendResponseTime":3144,"wgHostname":"mw1105"}); /* @nomin */
} );